
Introduction to Compiler: Phases and passes

A compiler is a computer program that transforms source code written in a programming language into another computer language. The most common reason for wanting to transform source code is to create an executable program. Compilers are a type of translator that support digital devices, primarily computers. The name compiler is primarily used for programs that translate source code from a high-level programming language to a lower level language (e.g., assembly language, object code, or machine code) to create an executable program.

Compilers are not limited to translating from high-level to low-level languages. They can also translate from one high-level language to another. For example, a compiler can translate from C++ to Java. This type of compiler is called a source-to-source compiler or transpiler.

The process of compiling a program is divided into phases. The front end of a compiler performs lexical analysis, syntactic analysis, and semantic analysis. The back end of a compiler performs optimizations and code generation.

The front end of a compiler is responsible for analyzing the source code and building a representation of the source code called an intermediate representation (IR). The IR is a simplified representation of the source code that is easier for the back end of the compiler to work with.

The back end of a compiler is responsible for taking the IR and translating it into the target language. The back end will also perform optimizations on the code to make it run faster or use less memory.

Compilers can be designed to target different types of architectures. A compiler that targets a specific type of architecture is called a cross compiler. For example, a compiler that targets the ARM architecture is called a cross compiler.

The different phases of a compiler are:

1. Lexical analysis: The lexical analyzer phase of a compiler takes as input a stream of characters and outputs a stream of tokens. A token is a group of characters with a specific meaning. For example, the C++ programming language has tokens for identifiers, keywords, operators, and punctuation.

2. Syntactic analysis: The syntactic analyzer phase of a compiler takes as input a stream of tokens and outputs a stream of syntactic constructs. A syntactic construct is a group of tokens with a specific meaning. For example, a C++ program is made up of syntactic constructs such as functions, classes, and control flow statements.

3. Semantic analysis: The semantic analyzer phase of a compiler takes as input a stream of syntactic constructs and outputs a stream of semantic constructs. A semantic construct is a group of tokens with a specific meaning. For example, a C++ program has semantic constructs such as variables, functions, and classes.

4. Code generation: The code generation phase of a compiler takes as input a stream of semantic constructs and outputs a stream of target code. Target code is a sequence of instructions that can be executed by a specific type of processor. For example, a compiler for the ARM architecture will generate target code that can be executed by an ARM processor.

5. Optimization: The optimization phase of a compiler takes as input a stream of target code and outputs a stream of optimized target code. Optimized target code is target code that has been modified to run faster or use less memory.


Bootstrapping

Bootstrapping is the process of designing a compiler such that it can compile itself. This is usually done by writing a simple compiler in a language that can be easily compiled by an existing compiler. The output of this simple compiler is then used to compile the full compiler.


Finite state machines and regular
expressions and their applications to lexical analysis

A finite state machine (FSM) is a mathematical model of computation used to design both computer programs and sequential logic circuits. It is conceived as an abstract machine that can be in one of a finite number of user-defined states. The machine is in only one state at a time; the state it is in at any given time is called the current state. It can change from one state to another when initiated by a triggering event or condition; this is called a transition. An FSM is defined by a list of its states, its initial state, and the inputs that trigger each transition. Finite state machines are of two types—deterministic finite state machines and non-deterministic finite state machines.

A regular expression (regex or regexp for short) is a special text string for describing a search pattern. You can think of regular expressions as wildcards on steroids. You are probably familiar with wildcard notations such as *.txt to find all text files in a file manager. The regex equivalent is .*\.txt.

Regular expressions are used in search engines, search and replace dialogs of word processors and text editors, in text processing utilities such as sed and AWK and in lexical analysis.

There are different syntaxes for regular expressions. The most common one is the POSIX standard.

The applications of FSM and regular expressions in lexical analysis are as follows:

1. FSMs are used to recognize patterns in the input stream.

2. Regular expressions are used to specify the patterns to be recognized by the FSMs.

3. The lexical analyzer uses FSMs to recognize the patterns specified by the regular expressions.

4. The lexical analyzer generates tokens from the recognized patterns.

5. The tokens are used by the compiler for further processing.


Optimization of DFA-Based Pattern Matchers
implementation of lexical analyzers

There are many ways to implement a DFA-based pattern matcher, and the choice of implementation can have a significant impact on performance. In this section, we describe some of the trade-offs involved in choosing an implementation and present a few specific techniques that can be used to optimize the performance of a DFA-based pattern matcher.

One of the most important decisions in implementing a DFA-based pattern matcher is the choice of data structures. The most obvious data structure to use is an array, with one element for each state in the DFA. However, this can be very inefficient, especially if the DFA has a large number of states. A more efficient data structure is a hash table, which can be used to store only the states that are actually reachable from the start state.

Another important consideration is the order in which the states are processed. In the simplest approach, the states are processed in order from the start state to the final state. However, this can be very inefficient, especially if the DFA has a large number of states. A more efficient approach is to process the states in reverse order, from the final state to the start state. This allows the DFA to be processed in a more efficient manner, by avoiding the need to process states that are not reachable from the start state.

Once the data structures have been chosen, the next step is to choose an algorithm for processing the states. The most obvious algorithm is to simply process the states in order from the start state to the final state. However, this can be very inefficient, especially if the DFA has a large number of states. A more efficient algorithm is to process the states in reverse order, from the final state to the start state. This allows the DFA to be processed in a more efficient manner, by avoiding the need to process states that are not reachable from the start state.

Finally, once the data structures and algorithms have been chosen, the last step is to choose an optimization technique. There are many different optimization techniques that can be used, and the choice of technique can have a significant impact on performance. Some of the most common optimization techniques are described below.

One common optimization technique is to precompute the transition table for the DFA. This can be done by simply storing the transition table in an array, with one element for each state in the DFA. This approach is very efficient, but it requires a large amount of memory.

Another common optimization technique is to use a lookahead buffer. This technique is especially useful when the DFA has a large number of states. The lookahead buffer is used to store the next few characters in the input stream, so that the DFA can be processed more efficiently.

Finally, another common optimization technique is to use a cache. This technique is especially useful when the DFA has a large number of states. The cache is used to store the results of previous computations, so that the DFA can be processed more efficiently.


lexical-analyzer generator

A lexical analyzer generator is a tool that can be used to create a lexical analyzer. A lexical analyzer is a program that can be used to analyze a stream of characters and break it up into tokens. Tokens are the basic units of meaning in a programming language. A token can be a keyword, an identifier, a literal, or an operator. A lexical analyzer generator takes as input a set of rules that describe how to break up a stream of characters into tokens. It then generates a lexical analyzer that can be used to tokenize a stream of characters.


LEX compiler

A LEX compiler is a tool used to generate a lexical analyzer. A lexical analyzer is a program that reads a stream of characters and divides them into tokens. Tokens are the basic units of a programming language. They are typically identifiers, keywords, operators, and punctuation marks. A LEX compiler takes as input a description of a programming language and generates a lexical analyzer for that language.

The input to a LEX compiler is a set of rules. Each rule has two parts: a regular expression and an action. The regular expression defines a pattern of characters. The action defines what should be done when the pattern is matched.

A LEX compiler generates a lexical analyzer that uses a finite automaton to recognize the patterns defined by the rules. The finite automaton has a state for each rule. When the lexical analyzer reads a character, it uses the automaton to determine which state to move to. When the automaton reaches a final state, the action associated with that state is executed.

A LEX compiler typically generates code in a programming language such as C or Java. The code generated by a LEX compiler can be used as a standalone program or it can be incorporated into a larger program.


Formal grammars
and their application to syntax analysis

A formal grammar is a set of rules that specifies how to form strings in a particular language. Formal grammars are used in many applications, including compiler design, natural language processing, and formal verification.

There are three main types of formal grammars: context-free grammars, context-sensitive grammars, and regular grammars. Context-free grammars are the most common type of grammar used in compiler design. They are used to specify the syntax of programming languages. Context-sensitive grammars are used to specify the semantics of programming languages. Regular grammars are used to specify the syntax of regular languages.

Formal grammars can be classified by their level of expressiveness. The most expressive type of grammar is the unrestricted grammar, which can be used to generate any string in a language. The least expressive type of grammar is the regular grammar, which can only be used to generate strings in a regular language.

The syntax of a programming language is typically specified using a context-free grammar. The semantics of a programming language is typically specified using a context-sensitive grammar. The syntax and semantics of a programming language can be specified using a single grammar, called a combined grammar.

Compilers use formal grammars to parse source code. Parsers are programs that take a source code file and generate an abstract syntax tree. The abstract syntax tree is a data structure that represents the structure of the source code.

Compilers use formal grammars to generate code. Code generators are programs that take an abstract syntax tree and generate code. The code that is generated is typically in a lower-level language, such as assembly language or machine code.

Compilers use formal grammars to optimize code. Optimizers are programs that take code and modify it to run faster or use less memory. Optimizers typically use a combination of static and dynamic analysis to find opportunities for optimization.

Formal grammars are also used in natural language processing. Natural language processing is the field of computer science that deals with the processing of natural language data. Natural language data includes text, speech, and other forms of communication.

Formal grammars are used in formal verification. Formal verification is the process of mathematically proving that a system meets its specifications. Formal verification is used in critical systems, such as aircraft control systems and medical devices.


BNF notation

Backus–Naur form (BNF) is a notation technique for context-free grammars, often used to describe the syntax of languages used in computing, such as computer programming languages, document formats, instruction sets and communication protocols. It is named after its inventors, John Backus and Peter Naur.

BNF consists of a set of production rules which describe how to form strings in the language that the grammar defines. Each production rule has two parts: a left-hand side and a right-hand side. The left-hand side of a production rule is a single nonterminal symbol. The right-hand side is a sequence of zero or more terminals and/or nonterminals, which is replaced by the left-hand side to generate a string in the language.

For example, consider the following production rule:

<expr> ::= <term> "+" <expr>

This production rule states that an expression (denoted by the nonterminal <expr>) is formed by concatenating a term (denoted by the nonterminal <term>) with a plus sign and another expression. This rule is intended to be used in the following way: given a string consisting of a term followed by a plus sign and another expression, this rule can be used to generate the string consisting of the term, the plus sign, and the expression.

The following is a more complete description of BNF notation:

BNF consists of a set of production rules.

A production rule has two parts: a left-hand side and a right-hand side.

The left-hand side of a production rule is a single nonterminal symbol.

The right-hand side of a production rule is a sequence of zero or more terminals and/or nonterminals.

A production rule is used to generate a string in the language by replacing the left-hand side with the right-hand side.

A terminal is a symbol that cannot be further divided into smaller parts.

A nonterminal is a symbol that can be further divided into smaller parts.

BNF is a notation for context-free grammars.


ambiguity

In computer science, ambiguity in a computer language is the ability to express a single concept in more than one way. Ambiguity is usually considered to be a bad thing, because it can make code more difficult to understand. For example, the C programming language is ambiguous in that a statement like "x = x + 1;" can be interpreted as either "increment the value of x by 1" or "set the value of x to the value of x plus 1".


YACC. The syntactic
specification of programming languages: Context free grammars

The Yet Another Compiler-Compiler (YACC) is a computer program for the Unix operating system that generates a parser, i.e. a program that performs syntactic analysis of source code written in a programming or scripting language, from a grammar specification. It was originally developed by Stephen C. Johnson at AT&T Bell Laboratories in the early 1970s.

YACC takes as input a context-free grammar and produces a C-language function that performs syntax analysis of files containing text conforming to that grammar. The function yyparse() generated by YACC is often invoked from a driver program written by the user. The driver program calls yyparse() to parse each input file; yyparse() in turn calls yylex(), a lexical analyzer function generated by the lexical analyzer generator lex, to break the input file into tokens. yylex() returns these tokens one at a time to yyparse(), which uses them to drive the parsing process.

When it encounters a syntax error, yyparse() calls yyerror(), another function generated by YACC, which prints an error message and may optionally perform error recovery. If yyparse() successfully completes its parse, it returns 0; otherwise it returns 1.

YACC is typically used to implement programming language compilers, although it can be used to process data from any system that can be described by a context-free grammar.


derivation and parse trees

A derivation is a sequence of productions that shows how a string can be derived from the start symbol of a grammar. A parse tree is a graphical representation of a derivation. It shows how the start symbol of a grammar derives a particular string.


capabilities of CFG.
Basic Parsing Techniques: Parsers

Parsers are used in compiler design to analyze the syntactic structure of source code and to detect errors in the code. There are two types of parsers: recursive descent parsers and LL parsers.

Recursive descent parsers are top-down parsers that use a set of recursive procedures to analyze the source code. LL parsers are bottom-up parsers that use a set of shift-reduce operations to analyze the source code.

Both types of parsers can be used to detect errors in the source code. However, recursive descent parsers are more difficult to write and debug than LL parsers.


Shift reduce parsing

Shift-reduce parsing is a parsing technique for context-free grammars that is somewhat similar to LR parsing. The main difference is that LR parsing uses a deterministic pushdown automaton that reads the input from left to right and uses a stack to keep track of the right-hand side of the productions while shift-reduce parsing uses a nondeterministic pushdown automaton that reads the input from left to right and uses a stack to keep track of the left-hand side of the productions.

The shift-reduce parser starts with the input on the left-hand side of the stack and a production on the right-hand side of the stack. It then uses the following algorithm:

1. If the top of the stack is a terminal and the next input symbol is the same, then match the terminal and consume the input symbol.

2. If the top of the stack is a nonterminal and the next input symbol is in the first set of the nonterminal, then replace the nonterminal with the right-hand side of the production.

3. If the top of the stack is a terminal and the next input symbol is not the same, then report a syntax error.

4. If the top of the stack is a nonterminal and the next input symbol is not in the first set of the nonterminal, then report a syntax error.

The shift-reduce parser uses a stack to keep track of the left-hand side of the productions. The stack is initially empty. When a production is reduced, the top of the stack is popped and the right-hand side of the production is pushed onto the stack in reverse order. For example, if the production A → B C D is reduced, then the stack will contain the symbols D C B A.

The shift-reduce parser is not as powerful as the LR parser because it can only handle a subset of the context-free grammars. However, it is easier to implement and can be used to parse simple grammars.


operator precedence parsing

Operator precedence parsing is a parsing technique used to determine the order in which operators are applied in an expression. It is a bottom-up parsing technique that uses a stack to keep track of operators that have not yet been applied.


top down
parsing

In top-down parsing, the parser starts at the root of the parse tree and
attempts to match the root against the input. If the match is successful,
the parser will attempt to match the root's children against the input,
working from left to right. If the match is unsuccessful, the parser will
backtrack to the last point at which it had a choice of which production
to use, and will try a different production. This process is repeated
until the input is successfully parsed or until the parser runs out of
options and reports a syntax error.


predictive parsers Automatic Construction of efficient Parsers: LR parsers

Predictive parsers are a type of parser used in compiler design. They are so called because they can predict which production rule to use without reading any further into the input. This makes them much more efficient than other types of parser, such as recursive descent parsers.

Predictive parsers are constructed using a parsing table, which contains one row for each non-terminal symbol in the grammar. Each row contains a column for each terminal symbol in the grammar. In each cell of the table, the parser writes the production rule that should be used when the corresponding non-terminal and terminal symbols are encountered in the input.

The process of constructing a predictive parser is as follows:

1) First, the grammar is converted into an equivalent grammar in which there is only one production rule for each non-terminal symbol, and this rule has no more than two symbols on the right-hand side. This can be done by introducing new non-terminal symbols and new production rules until the desired property is achieved.

2) Next, the first and follow sets are computed for each non-terminal symbol in the grammar. The first set of a non-terminal symbol is the set of terminal symbols that can appear first in a string derived from that non-terminal symbol. The follow set of a non-terminal symbol is the set of terminal symbols that can appear immediately after that non-terminal symbol in any string derived from the start symbol.

3) The parsing table is then constructed using the first and follow sets. For each non-terminal symbol, the parser checks the first set of that symbol. If the first set contains a terminal symbol, then the parser adds a production for that terminal symbol to the table. If the first set does not contain a terminal symbol, then the parser checks the follow set. If the follow set contains a terminal symbol, then the parser adds a production for that terminal symbol to the table. If the follow set does not contain a terminal symbol, then the parser adds a production for the empty string to the table.

4) Finally, the parser uses the parsing table to parse the input. For each terminal symbol in the input, the parser looks up the corresponding production in the table and uses that production to derive a string of symbols from the input.


the canonical
Collection of LR(0) items

The canonical collection of LR(0) items is a set of items that can be used to construct an LR(0) parsing table. It is a subset of the LR(0) items, and it can be constructed from the LR(0) items by using a process called item closure.


constructing SLR parsing tables

There is no one definitive answer to this question. However, a few key points that would need to be covered in a complete description of constructing SLR parsing tables would include an explanation of what an SLR parser is, how an SLR parser works, and what information is needed in order to construct an SLR parsing table. Additionally, a complete description would likely include a worked example of constructing an SLR parsing table, in order to illustrate the process.


constructing Canonical LR parsing
tables

The process of constructing Canonical LR parsing tables is a method of compiler design that allows for the efficient parsing of LR(k) grammars. The technique is to first construct an augmented grammar that is LR(k), and then to use this grammar to generate an LR parsing table. The augmented grammar is constructed by adding a new start symbol to the grammar, and adding new productions that allow the parser to keep track of its position in the input string. The LR parsing table is then generated by using the augmented grammar to determine the next action to take, based on the current state of the parser and the next input symbol.


Constructing LALR parsing tables

There are two main steps in constructing an LALR parsing table:

1. First, the set of LR(0) items for the grammar must be constructed. This can be done using a simple algorithm:

2. Next, the LR(0) items are used to construct the LALR parsing table. This is done using a more complex algorithm, which is beyond the scope of this answer.


using ambiguous grammars

An ambiguous grammar is a grammar that can generate a sentence that has more than one parse tree. This can happen when there are multiple ways to group the symbols in the sentence. For example, the sentence "I saw the man with the telescope" can be parsed in two different ways:

I saw (the man with the telescope)

or

(I saw the man) with the telescope

In general, ambiguous grammars can be difficult to work with because it can be hard to predict which parse tree will be generated for a given sentence. However, they can be useful in some situations, such as when you want to allow for multiple interpretations of a sentence.


an automatic parser
generator

An automatic parser generator is a tool that automatically generates a parser from a grammar. The generated parser can be used to parse input strings that match the grammar.


implementation of LR parsing tables.
Syntax-directed Translation: Syntax-directed Translation schemes

In a syntax-directed translation scheme, the actions associated with grammar symbols are executed as the symbols are recognized during parsing. The actions can be of two types:

1. Generate code: This action is associated with a grammar symbol and causes code to be generated when the grammar symbol is recognized during parsing.

2. Evaluate: This action is associated with a grammar symbol and causes an arithmetic expression to be evaluated when the grammar symbol is recognized during parsing.

A syntax-directed translation scheme is a quadruple (G, A, S, P) where

G is a context-free grammar,

A is a set of actions,

S is the start symbol, and

P is a set of production rules of the form

A → α where A is a nonterminal, α is a string of terminals and nonterminals, and A → α is a production rule in G.

The actions associated with the symbols in α are executed in left-to-right order as α is recognized during parsing.


Implementation of Syntax-directed Translators

A syntax-directed translator is a compiler that uses a specific set of rules to generate code for a target programming language. These rules are typically based on the structure of the source code, and they are designed to produce code that is equivalent to the source code. Syntax-directed translators can be used to generate code for any programming language, but they are most commonly used to generate code for languages that are not well suited for traditional compiler techniques.


Intermediate code

Intermediate code is a representation of a program in a form that is easier for a compiler to work with than the original program. It is often in a form that is close to the final machine code, but not necessarily in the same form.


postfix notation

In computer science, postfix notation is a notation for writing arithmetic expressions in which the operands appear before their operators. It is also known as reverse Polish notation (RPN).

In postfix notation, the operator is always placed after its operands. For example, the infix expression 3 + 4 would be written as 3 4 + in postfix notation.

Postfix notation is often used in computer science because it can be easily implemented using a stack. In postfix notation, each operator is processed after its operands have been processed. This is done by first pushing the operands onto a stack, and then applying the operator to the top two elements on the stack.

For example, consider the infix expression 3 + 4 * 5. This can be rewritten in postfix notation as 3 4 5 * +. To evaluate this expression using a stack, we would first push 3 onto the stack. Then, we would push 4 onto the stack. Next, we would push 5 onto the stack. At this point, the stack would contain the following elements:

3 4 5

Now, we would apply the * operator to the top two elements on the stack, which would give us 20. We would then push this result onto the stack, so that the stack now contains the following elements:

3 4 20

Finally, we would apply the + operator to the top two elements on the stack, which would give us 23. This is the final result of the expression.

Postfix notation can be used to evaluate any arithmetic expression. However, it is important to note that not all operators can be implemented using a stack. For example, the division operator cannot be implemented using a stack, because it requires that the divisor be placed on the stack before the dividend.

Postfix notation is also used in some computer programming languages, such as Forth and PostScript. In these languages, all operators are implemented using stacks.


Parse trees & syntax trees

A parse tree or parsing tree or derivation tree or concrete syntax tree is an ordered, rooted tree that represents the syntactic structure of a string according to some context-free grammar. The term parse tree itself is used primarily in computational linguistics; in theoretical syntax, the term syntax tree is more common.

A concrete syntax tree is a parse tree in which every node is a terminal symbol or a non-terminal symbol followed by zero or more children, each of which is a concrete syntax tree for a string derived from the non-terminal symbol.

A parse tree is usually transformed in an abstract syntax tree, which discards some of the information from the parse tree, such as positioning and ordering of the nodes, and replaces it with abstractions. This allows the semantic analysis phase to deal with a single type of tree, which makes it possible to write a generic parser.


three address
code

Three address code is a type of intermediate code used by compilers to represent the assembly code that would be generated for a particular instruction. It uses three operands for each instruction, which are typically the two source operands and the destination operand. The three address code for an instruction is typically generated by the compiler during the code generation phase.


quadruple & triples

A quadruple is a data structure used in a compiler. It is similar to a triple, but with four fields instead of three. The fields are typically called op, arg1, arg2, and result. They represent an operation to be performed, and the two operands (arg1 and arg2) and result of the operation.


translation of assignment statements

The translation of assignment statements in compiler design is the process of converting the source code of a program into the machine code that can be executed by a computer. This process is usually done by a compiler, which is a program that translates the source code into the machine code. The machine code is then stored in a file, which is called an executable file. When the user runs the executable file, the machine code is executed and the results are displayed on the screen.


Boolean expressions

A Boolean expression is an expression that evaluates to a Boolean value, that is, true or false. Boolean expressions are used in conditional statements, such as if, while, and for, to control the flow of execution of a program.

Boolean expressions can be constructed from Boolean variables, constants, and the Boolean operators AND, OR, and NOT. Boolean variables are variables that can take on one of two values, true or false. Boolean constants are the values true and false. The Boolean operators AND, OR, and NOT are used to combine Boolean expressions.

The AND operator takes two Boolean expressions and evaluates to true if both expressions are true. The OR operator takes two Boolean expressions and evaluates to true if either expression is true. The NOT operator takes a Boolean expression and inverts it, that is, it evaluates to true if the expression is false and false if the expression is true.

Boolean expressions can be used to express complex conditions. For example, the condition (x < 10 AND y > 20) OR (x > 30 AND y < 40) can be expressed as the Boolean expression (x < 10 OR x > 30) AND (y > 20 OR y < 40).

Boolean expressions can be simplified using the laws of Boolean algebra. For example, the expression (x < 10 AND y > 20) OR (x > 30 AND y < 40) can be simplified to (x < 10 OR y > 20) OR (x > 30 AND y < 40), which is equivalent to (x < 10 OR y > 20) OR (x > 30 OR y < 40), which is equivalent to (x < 10 OR x > 30 OR y > 20) AND (x < 10 OR x > 30 OR y < 40), which is equivalent to (x < 10 OR x > 30) AND (y > 20 OR y < 40).


statements
that alter the flow of control

There are a few different types of statements that can alter the flow of control in a compiler:

1. Conditionals: if, switch, and ?:
2. Loops: while, do-while, for, and foreach
3. Jump statements: break, continue, return, and goto

Conditionals are used to execute a certain block of code only if a certain condition is met. If the condition is not met, the code will not be executed.

Loops are used to execute a certain block of code multiple times. The number of times the code is executed depends on the type of loop.

Jump statements are used to transfer control to another part of the code. This can be used to skip over code that is not needed, or to exit a code block early.


postfix translation

In computer science, postfix notation is a notation for writing arithmetic expressions in which the operands appear before their operators. It is also known as reverse Polish notation (RPN).

In postfix notation, the operator is always placed after its operands. For example, the infix expression A + B would be written as AB+ in postfix.

Postfix notation is often used in computer science because it can be easily implemented with a stack. When an operator is encountered, the two operands are popped from the stack, the operator is applied to them, and the result is pushed back onto the stack.

This process continues until the entire expression has been evaluated. The final result will be the top element on the stack.


translation with a top down parser. More about
translation: Array references in arithmetic expressions

A top-down parser is a parser that generates a parse tree for a given input string by working from the top down, starting with the root node. It first tries to match the input string with the production rules of the root node. If it fails, it backtracks and tries to match the input string with the production rules of the next node. It continues this process until it either reaches a leaf node or finds a match for the input string.

A top-down parser can be either recursive or non-recursive. A recursive top-down parser is one that uses a recursive descent parsing algorithm. A non-recursive top-down parser is one that uses an iterative descent parsing algorithm.

The advantage of a top-down parser is that it can be easily implemented using a recursive descent parsing algorithm. The disadvantage of a top-down parser is that it can be inefficient, especially if the grammar is ambiguous.

The most common type of top-down parser is the recursive descent parser.


procedures call

Procedure call is a mechanism for invoking a subroutine or a procedure. A procedure call is usually implemented by placing the address of the first instruction of the called procedure on the top of the stack and then transferring the control to the called procedure. The called procedure uses this address to return to the caller.


declarations and case
statements.
Symbol Tables: Data structure for symbols tables

A symbol table is a data structure used by a language translator such as a compiler or interpreter, where each identifier in a program's source code is associated with information relating to its declaration or appearance in the source. This information is typically stored in a symbol table.

For example, in a C program, each identifier (variable, function, etc.) is associated with information such as its type, scope, and location. This information can be used by the compiler to generate code, or by a debugger to verify the correctness of the program.

A symbol table is usually implemented as a hash table, where the identifier is used as the key to look up the associated information.


representing scope information. Run-Time
Administration: Implementation of simple stack allocation scheme

In compiler design, a stack allocation scheme is a way of allocating storage for variables in a stack-based environment. The scheme is simple in that it only requires a single stack pointer, which is used to point to the top of the stack. Variables are then allocated to the stack by pushing them onto the stack. When a variable is no longer needed, it is popped off the stack.

The main advantage of this scheme is that it is very efficient. Storage for variables is only allocated when it is needed, and is deallocated when it is no longer needed. This can save a lot of memory, especially in cases where variables are only needed for a short period of time.

Another advantage of this scheme is that it is very easy to implement. The only data structure that is needed is a stack, which can be easily implemented in any programming language.

The main disadvantage of this scheme is that it is not very flexible. Once a variable is allocated to the stack, it cannot be moved to another location. This can be a problem if a variable needs to be used in multiple places, or if it needs to be stored for a long period of time.

Overall, the stack allocation scheme is a very efficient and easy to implement solution for allocating storage for variables in a stack-based environment.


storage allocation in block
structured language. Error Detection & Recovery: Lexical Phase errors

In a block structured language, storage allocation is the process of allocating storage for data and code within a program. This can be done statically, at compile time, or dynamically, at run time. Static allocation is when the size and location of data and code is known at compile time and does not change during execution. Dynamic allocation is when the size and location of data and code can change during execution.

In a block structured language, storage allocation is typically done statically, at compile time. This means that the size and location of data and code is known at compile time and does not change during execution. Static allocation is usually more efficient than dynamic allocation, because the compiler can optimize the code for the static allocation.

One downside of static allocation is that it can lead to wasted space. For example, if a program has a large array that is only used in one part of the program, the rest of the array will take up space that could be used for other data. Another downside of static allocation is that it can lead to fragmentation, which is when the data is spread out in memory and is difficult to access.

Dynamic allocation is when the size and location of data and code can change during execution. Dynamic allocation is usually less efficient than static allocation, because the compiler cannot optimize the code for the dynamic allocation.

One advantage of dynamic allocation is that it can lead to more efficient use of space. For example, if a program has a large array that is only used in one part of the program, the rest of the array will not take up space that could be used for other data. Another advantage of dynamic allocation is that it can lead to less fragmentation, because the data is not spread out in memory and is easier to access.


syntactic phase errors
semantic errors.
Code Generation: Design Issues

Syntactic phase errors are errors that occur during the syntactic phase of compilation, when the compiler is parsing the source code and building the symbol table. Semantic errors are errors that occur during the semantic phase of compilation, when the compiler is checking the semantics of the source code. Code generation is the process of translating the source code into machine code.


the Target Language. Addresses in the Target Code

The Target Code is the code that the compiler generates after it has finished compiling the source code. The target code is usually in a lower-level language than the source code, and it is often optimized for the specific architecture of the target machine.


Basic
Blocks and Flow Graphs

A basic block is a sequence of consecutive code statements which has only one entry point and one exit point. A flow graph is a graphical representation of the control flow of a program. It consists of a set of nodes, which represent basic blocks, and a set of edges, which represent the flow of control from one basic block to another.


Optimization of Basic Blocks

The basic blocks of a program are those portions of the code that are always executed together. In order to optimize the execution of a program, the compiler must identify the basic blocks and then rearrange the code so that the basic blocks are executed in the most efficient order.

There are a number of different ways to optimize the execution of basic blocks. The most common approach is to use a technique called code motion. Code motion involves moving code from one basic block to another so that the code is executed in a more efficient order.

Another common optimization technique is called loop unrolling. Loop unrolling involves taking a loop that is executed multiple times and unrolling it so that the code within the loop is executed only once. This can lead to a significant improvement in performance, since the code within the loop does not need to be executed multiple times.

Finally, another optimization technique that is often used on basic blocks is called register allocation. Register allocation involves assigning values to registers so that the values can be used more efficiently. This can lead to a significant improvement in performance, since the values do not need to be stored in memory and can be accessed more quickly.


Code Generator. Code optimization:
Machine-Independent Optimizations

1. Code generators are used to produce optimized code for a specific target architecture.

2. The main goal of code generation is to produce code that is both efficient and easy to read.

3. Code generators use a variety of techniques to achieve these goals, including:

4. Register allocation: This technique assigns variables to specific CPU registers in order to minimize memory access and improve performance.

5. Instruction selection: This technique chooses the best instructions for the target architecture, based on the semantics of the source code.

6. Instruction scheduling: This technique rearranges instructions to improve performance.

7. Code motion: This technique moves code around in order to improve performance.

8. Code generation is a complex process, and the quality of the generated code depends heavily on the quality of the code generator.

9. Good code generators are able to produce code that is both efficient and easy to read.


Loop optimization

Loop optimization is the process of improving the performance of a loop by making it execute faster and/or use less resources. The main goals of loop optimization are to reduce the number of loop iterations, reduce the amount of work done in each iteration, and improve the efficiency of the loop code.

There are a number of techniques that can be used to optimize loops, including loop unrolling, loop invariant code motion, and cache blocking. Loop unrolling is a technique that can be used to improve the performance of a loop by reducing the number of loop iterations. Loop unrolling works by taking a loop that executes a fixed number of times and unrolling it so that it executes a smaller number of times. For example, a loop that executes 10 times can be unrolled to execute 5 times.

Loop invariant code motion is a technique that can be used to improve the performance of a loop by moving code that is invariant across all iterations of the loop out of the loop. Loop invariant code motion works by taking code that is invariant across all iterations of the loop and moving it out of the loop. For example, code that initializes a variable can be moved out of a loop if the variable is not modified inside the loop.

Cache blocking is a technique that can be used to improve the performance of a loop by improving the way data is accessed in memory. Cache blocking works by taking advantage of the fact that data is typically accessed in blocks in memory. Cache blocking works by dividing the data that is accessed by a loop into blocks and then accessing the blocks of data in a way that is optimized for the cache.


DAG representation of basic blocks

A DAG is a directed acyclic graph. The nodes in the graph represent the basic blocks in the program, and the edges represent the control flow between the blocks. The DAG can be used to represent the control flow of the program, and to optimize the order in which the basic blocks are executed.


value numbers and algebraic laws

In compiler design, value numbers and algebraic laws are used to optimize the code. Value numbers are used to represent the values of variables, and algebraic laws are used to simplify the expressions.


Global Data-Flow analysis.

In compiler design, global data-flow analysis is a type of data-flow analysis that computes information about the flow of data through a program. Global data-flow analysis is usually more powerful than local data-flow analysis, but it is also more expensive to compute.

Global data-flow analysis can be used to compute a variety of information about a program, including:

* The set of all variables that are live at a given point in the program (i.e., the set of all variables that may be read or written at that point).
* The set of all variables that are read before they are written (i.e., the set of all variables that are used before they are defined).
* The set of all variables that are written before they are read (i.e., the set of all variables that are defined before they are used).
* The set of all variables that are read and written in the same basic block (i.e., the set of all variables that are both defined and used in the same basic block).

Global data-flow analysis is usually performed using a data-flow analysis framework, which is a general purpose framework for data-flow analysis. A data-flow analysis framework typically consists of three components:

* A data-flow analysis lattice, which defines the set of possible values that a variable can take at a given point in the program.
* A data-flow analysis transfer function, which defines how the value of a variable changes as the program executes.
* A data-flow analysis solver, which computes the value of a variable at each point in the program using the data-flow analysis lattice and transfer function.

The data-flow analysis lattice for global data-flow analysis is usually a lattice of sets of variables. The data-flow analysis transfer function for global data-flow analysis is usually a function that takes two sets of variables (the set of variables that are live at a given point in the program, and the set of variables that are read or written at that point) and returns the union of those two sets.

The data-flow analysis solver for global data-flow analysis is usually a worklist algorithm, which iteratively computes the value of a variable at each point in the program. A worklist algorithm works by starting with a set of initial values (usually the set of all variables that are live at the entry point of the program) and then repeatedly applying the data-flow analysis transfer function until a fixed point is reached (i.e., until the value of a variable does not change when the data-flow analysis transfer function is applied).

Global data-flow analysis is usually more expensive to compute than local data-flow analysis because it requires the data-flow analysis solver to iterate over the entire program, rather than just a single basic block. However, global data-flow analysis is usually more powerful than local data-flow analysis because it can compute information about the flow of data through the entire program, rather than just a single basic block.


Introduction to Compiler: Phases and passes

A compiler is a computer program that transforms computer code written in one programming language into another programming language. Compilers are a type of translator that support digital devices, typically enabling them to communicate with each other.

The process of compiling a program involves converting the code written in a high-level language into a format that can be read and executed by a machine. This usually involves breaking the code down into smaller pieces, translating each piece into machine code, and then putting all of the machine code together into a single file.

Compilers can be either standalone programs or they can be integrated into larger software development environments (IDEs). Integrated compilers are usually found in modern IDEs and they allow developers to compile their code and run it directly from within the IDE.

The main components of a compiler are the lexical analyzer, the parser, the semantic analyzer, and the code generator.

The lexical analyzer is responsible for breaking the code down into smaller pieces, called tokens. The parser then takes those tokens and arranges them into a structure that can be read and understood by the machine. The semantic analyzer checks the code for correctness and makes sure that it follows the rules of the programming language. Finally, the code generator produces the machine code that can be executed by the machine.

Compilers can be designed for different programming languages and different machines. Some compilers can translate code from one language to another, while others can only translate code for a specific language or machine.


Bootstrapping

The primary motivation for bootstrapping is to produce a compiler that can be run on a machine that doesn't have a native compiler for that machine. This is achieved by having the newly-produced compiler be used to compile itself. This process is sometimes referred to as "compiling a compiler with a compiler".

The end result of bootstrapping is a compiler that is able to run on the target machine, and can be used to compile programs written in the language that the compiler understands.


Finite state machines and regular
expressions and their applications to lexical analysis

Finite state machines (FSMs) are abstract machines that can be in one of a finite number of states.
They can read an input from a tape and move from one state to another, based on the input.
Regular expressions are a way of describing patterns in strings, such as the number of occurrences
of a certain character.

For lexical analysis in compiler design, FSMs can be used to recognise keywords, identifiers and
operators in the source code. Regular expressions can be used to validate the syntax of the source
code and to determine which tokens should be associated with which source code elements.


Optimization of DFA-Based Pattern Matchers
implementation of lexical analyzers

The main task of a lexical analyzer is to convert a stream of characters into a stream of tokens. A token is a pair consisting of a token name and an optional token value. The first step in performing this task is to design a finite automaton that recognizes the set of all possible tokens in the source program. This can be done by constructing a regular expression for each token and then converting the regular expression into an equivalent finite automaton.

There are two main approaches to constructing a finite automaton for a regular expression: the Brzozowski method and the Glen-Stewart method. The Brzozowski method is more efficient in terms of the number of states in the resulting automaton, while the Glen-Stewart method is more efficient in terms of the number of transitions.

Once the automaton has been constructed, the next step is to implement it in software. There are two main approaches to doing this: the table-driven approach and the recursive descent approach.

The table-driven approach is more efficient in terms of the amount of memory required, while the recursive descent approach is more efficient in terms of the amount of time required.

Once the automaton has been implemented, the next step is to test it. This can be done by feeding it a stream of characters and checking that it correctly recognizes the set of all possible tokens.


lexical-analyzer generator

A lexical analyzer generator is a tool used to create lexical analyzers. A lexical analyzer is a program that can be used to analyze a stream of text and identify the tokens that make up the stream. The tokens can be keywords, identifiers, punctuation, etc. The lexical analyzer generator will take a file containing a set of rules and generate a lexical analyzer that can be used to analyze a stream of text. The lexical analyzer generator will also generate a table of tokens that can be used by the compiler to identify the tokens.


LEX compiler

A LEX compiler is a tool used to generate a lexical analyzer. A lexical analyzer is a program that breaks down an input stream into tokens. Tokens are strings of characters with a certain meaning. For example, in the C programming language, the tokens would include things like keywords, identifiers, operators, and so on. 

A LEX compiler takes as input a set of rules that specify how to break down the input stream into tokens. The rules are written in a special format, and they use regular expressions to specify the patterns to match. Once the rules are written, the LEX compiler generates the code for the lexical analyzer. This code can then be compiled and linked with the rest of the program.

The LEX compiler is a powerful tool that can be used to create lexical analyzers for a wide variety of languages. It is flexible and easy to use, and it can save a lot of time when compared to writing a lexical analyzer by hand.


Formal grammars
and their application to syntax analysis

A Formal grammar is a precise way of describing a language. It is a set of production rules for transforming strings in a language into other strings in the same language. The rules describe how to construct valid strings from the language's alphabet.

Formal grammars are used in syntax analysis, which is the process of determining whether a given string is a valid sentence in the language. Syntax analysis is usually done by a computer program, so the formal grammar must be precise and complete.

There are two main types of formal grammars: context-free grammars and regular grammars. Context-free grammars are more powerful than regular grammars, but they are also more complex.Context-free grammars are used to describe most programming languages.

Regular grammars are used to describe simpler languages, such as regular expressions.


BNF notation

The BNF notation is a notation used to describe the syntax of a formal language. The BNF notation consists of a set of rules that define the syntactic structure of the language. The BNF notation is typically used to describe the syntax of programming languages.


ambiguity

In computing, ambiguity in a computer language is the ability to meaningfully interpret a given statement or symbol in more than one way. In contrast, unambiguous languages allow only one interpretation per statement.ambiguity can be classified as lexical, syntactic, or semantic.

The term "ambiguity" is used in grammar to refer to situations where a phrase, word, or sentence can be interpreted in more than one way. This can be due to multiple meanings of a word, or to structural differences between phrases that have the same surface meaning. For example, the phrases "flying planes can be dangerous" and "all my friends are dangerous" are ambiguous because the word "dangerous" can refer to either the activity of flying, or to the people who are doing the flying.

In computer programming, ambiguity is often caused by the use of symbols that have more than one meaning, or by the use of multiple symbols that can be interpreted in different ways. For example, the symbols + and - can be interpreted as either addition or subtraction, depending on the context in which they are used. The symbol * can be interpreted as multiplication or as wildcard character in a file name.

Ambiguity can also be caused by the use of different syntactic constructs that have the same meaning. For example, the if...then...else construct can be written in a number of different ways, using different keywords, such as:

if condition then statement

if condition statement else

statement if condition

All of these constructs are equivalent, but can be interpreted differently depending on the meaning that the programmer intends to convey.

Semantic ambiguity occurs when a phrase or sentence can be interpreted in more than one way due to the way the words are used together. For example, the phrase "the cat sat on the mat" is ambiguous because it is not clear which cat is being referred to, and whether the cat is sitting on the mat, or the mat is sitting on the cat.

In general, ambiguity is to be avoided in computer programming, because it can lead to errors and make code difficult to understand. However, some programming languages make use of ambiguity as a way of making code more concise or easier to write. For example, the C programming language allows the use of operators that have more than one meaning, such as the + and - operators, which can be used for addition and subtraction, respectively.

In compiler design, ambiguity is often introduced deliberately in order to make the compiler's job easier. For example, many compilers use context-free grammars, which allow them to parse code without having to keep track of the meaning of each individual statement. However, this can lead to errors if the grammar is not carefully designed, because it can allow the compiler to generate code that is impossible to execute.


YACC. The syntactic
specification of programming languages: Context free grammars

YACC main purpose is to generate a parser that is able to analyze the semantics of a program written in a programming language. A parser is a program that reads a stream of characters and breaks it up into meaningful constructs, such as words, numbers, and items in lists. 

The YACC parser is used in a two-pass compiler. The first pass scans the input source code and generates a listing of all the tokens it finds. This listing is then passed to the parser, which uses it to construct a parse tree. The parse tree shows the relationships between the various constructs in the source code. 

The YACC parser can also be used to generate a symbol table, which is a database of all the identifiers used in a program and their associated information, such as type, scope, and value. The symbol table is used by the compiler to generate code for the target machine. 

YACC is a product of AT&T Bell Laboratories and is available on many Unix systems.


derivation and parse trees

In compiler design, a parser is a program or function that takes a text or code as input and breaks it up into meaningful elements, such as words, phrases, numbers, and identifier symbols. Parsers are used in a variety of applications, including text editors, web browsers, and compilers.

A parser typically consists of two major parts: a lexical analyzer or scanner and a syntax analyzer. The lexical analyzer breaks up the input into tokens, which are then passed to the syntax analyzer. The syntax analyzer builds up the structure of the input and checks for correct syntax.

There are two main types of parsers: recursive descent parsers and shift-reduce parsers. Recursive descent parsers use a top-down approach, while shift-reduce parsers use a bottom-up approach.

There are several different methods of representing the structure of the input. The most common are parse trees and abstract syntax trees. Parse trees are a graphical representation of the input, while abstract syntax trees are a more abstract representation.

Compilers typically use a combination of both parse trees and abstract syntax trees to represent the input. The parse tree is used to verify the correctness of the input, while the abstract syntax tree is used for code generation.


capabilities of CFG.
Basic Parsing Techniques: Parsers

In general, a parser is a software program that accepts input in a certain formal language and breaks it up into parts (for example, words and phrases) that can be used to derive meaning from the input. Parsers are used in a wide variety of applications, ranging from compilers (which take programming language code as input and output assembly or machine code) to web browsers (which take HTML and CSS code as input and output rendered web pages).

CFG parsers use a technique called bottom-up parsing. Bottom-up parsing starts with the input and gradually builds up a parse tree from the bottom (i.e., the leaves) to the top (i.e., the root). The leaves of the parse tree are the terminals (tokens) in the input, and the root is the start symbol of the CFG.

Bottom-up parsers can be categorized into two main types: shift-reduce parsers and LR parsers.

Shift-reduce parsers are the simplest type of bottom-up parser. They work by repeatedly shifting tokens from the input to a stack, and then reducing the topmost element on the stack according to a CFG rule, until the stack contains only the start symbol and the input is empty.

LR parsers are more powerful than shift-reduce parsers, and can handle a larger class of CFGs. LR parsers work by reading the input from left to right and maintaining a stack of symbols. For each token read from the input, the LR parser consults a table to find the appropriate action to take. The LR parser can either shift the token onto the stack or reduce the topmost element on the stack according to a CFG rule.


Shift reduce parsing

Shift-reduce parsing is a bottom-up parsing technique that uses a stack to hold symbols and that enables a program to detect and resolve conflicts that occur during parsing. This technique is used in many computer languages, including C, C++, Java, and Python.


operator precedence parsing

Operator precedence parsing is a recursive descent parsing technique where each operator is given a precedence level which dictates the order in which the operators are applied. Operators with higher precedence levels are applied first, followed by operators with lower precedence levels. This parsing technique is used to avoid ambiguity in operator precedence.


top down
parsing

In top-down parsing, the input is read from left to right and the parse tree is built from the top down, starting with the root nonterminal. The parser successively rewrites the input, replacing substrings that match the nonterminals of the grammar until onlyterminals remain, at which point a valid parse tree will have been constructed.

Top-down parsing is often used with recursive descent parsers, which directly implement the rewriting rules of the grammar. However, any parsing algorithm that can construct a parse tree from the root down can be considered top-down.

There are two main benefits of top-down parsing. First, it is usually easier to design and understand a top-down parser than a bottom-up parser. Second, a top-down parser can be more efficient in terms of time and memory usage than a bottom-up parser, since it only needs to remember the current state of the parse, rather than the entire parse history.

There are also some drawbacks to top-down parsing. First, it can be difficult to handle ambiguous grammars with a top-down parser. Second, a top-down parser may require more backtracking than a bottom-up parser, since it needs to try different rewriting rules at each stage in the parse.


predictive parsers Automatic Construction of efficient Parsers: LR parsers

Parsers are used in compiler design to break down programming code into its component parts so that the code can be translated into machine readable code. A predictive parser is a type of parser that can determine which production rules to use in order to parse a given input without having to backtrack. This makes predictive parsers much more efficient than other types of parsers, such as LR parsers.

Predictive parsers use a parsing table to determine which production rule to use. The table is constructed from the grammar of the language being parsed. The predictive parser will go through the input string, one character at a time, and consult the parsing table to see which production rule to use. If the input string does not match the grammar, then the predictive parser will stop and report an error.

Predictive parsers can be constructed automatically from a grammar using algorithms such as the Cocke-Younger-Kasami algorithm. These parsers are typically used in compilers and interpreters for programming languages.


the canonical
Collection of LR(0) items

The LR(0) items are a set of items that are used in LR(0) parsing. They are a subset of the LR(1) items, and are used to represent the different states that can occur during LR(0) parsing. Each LR(0) item consists of a production, and a position within that production. The position can be thought of as a pointer, that points to a particular symbol within the production. The LR(0) items are used to represent the set of possible states that can occur during LR(0) parsing, and are used to determine what action needs to be taken in order to move from one state to another.


constructing SLR parsing tables

** Constructing SLR Parsing Tables **

Compilers use parsing algorithms to analyze the syntax of programming languages and to determine whether the programs are valid according to the language's rules. An LR parser (left-to-right, rightmost-derivation-in-linear-time) is a type of parser that analyzes the program from left to right and constructs a rightmost derivation of the program in linear time.

An LR parser can be implemented as a pushdown automaton that uses a parsing table to control its operation. The parsing tablespecifies what action the parser should take in each state when it sees a particular input symbol.

The first step in constructing an LR parsing table is to determine the set of LR(0) items. LR(0) items are the those items that can be added to the current parse state without changing the parsing behavior of the LR parser.

To determine the set of LR(0) items, we first need to construct the LR(0) automaton. The LR(0) automaton is a finite-state machine that has one state for each item in the LR(0) item set. The LR(0) automaton transitions from one state to another when it sees a grammar symbol that can be shifted in the LR(0) item.

The set of LR(0) items can be used to construct the LR(1) item set, which is the set of items that can be added to the current parse state without changing the parsing behavior of the LR(1) parser. LR(1) items are LR(0) items with an additional lookahead condition.

To determine the set of LR(1) items, we first need to construct the LR(1) automaton. The LR(1) automaton is a finite-state machine that has one state for each item in the LR(1) item set. The LR(1) automaton transitions from one state to another when it sees a grammar symbol that can be shifted in the LR(1) item.

The LR(1) automaton can be used to construct the SLR parsing table. The SLR parsing table is a table that specifies what action the parser should take in each state when it sees a particular input symbol.

The SLR parsing table has the following format:

State | Input Symbol | Action

The first column of the table specifies the state of the LR(1) automaton. The second column specifies the input symbol. The third column specifies the action to be taken by the parser when it is in the state specified in the first column and it sees the input symbol specified in the second column.

The action to be taken by the parser can be one of the following:

Shift: The parser moves to the state specified by the action and reads the next input symbol.

Reduce: The parser reduces the current input symbol by the grammar rule specified by the action.

Accept: The parser accepts the input and halts.

Error: The parser reports an error and halts.

The SLR parser uses the parsing table to control its operation. The parser starts in the initial state, which is the state corresponding to the LR(0) item S' -> .S. The parser then reads the next input symbol and uses the second column of the parsing table to look up the action to be taken.

If the action is shift, the parser moves to the state specified by the action and reads the next input symbol. If the action is reduce, the parser reduces the current input symbol by the grammar rule specified by the action. If the action is accept, the parser accepts the input and halts. If the action is error, the parser reports an error and halts.


constructing Canonical LR parsing
tables

There are a few steps involved in constructing a Canonical LR parsing table:

1) Construct theItem sets for all symbols in the grammar.

2) Construct the Goto sets for all symbols in the grammar.

3) Initialize the parse table by setting all entries to error.

4) Fill in the action entries in the table using theItem sets.

5) Fill in the goto entries in the table using the Goto sets.


Constructing LALR parsing tables

The LR (1) parsing algorithm is a top-down parsing algorithm that uses a parsing table with two dimensions, one for each nonterminal and one for each terminal symbol. The table entries specify the appropriate grammar rule to use when the given nonterminal is the current symbol and the given terminal is the next input symbol. The algorithm reads the input from left to right, maintaining a stack of symbols that represent the portion of the input that has been parsed so far. The top of the stack always holds the current symbol, and the rest of the symbols on the stack represent the RHS of the grammar rule that is being used to expand the current symbol. When the next input symbol is a terminal, the current symbol is popped off the stack and the input symbol is pushed. When the next input symbol is a nonterminal, the current symbol is expanded using the table to determine the appropriate grammar rule, and the RHS of the grammar rule is pushed onto the stack in reverse order.

The LR (1) parsing algorithm is similar to the LR (0) parsing algorithm, but with one important extension. In addition to a parser table with two dimensions, the LR (1) parsing algorithm uses a set of items. An item is a production rule with a "dot" that indicates the point of expansion. For example, the item S → .Ab is a valid LR (1) item because it is the production rule S → Ab with the "dot" indicating that the next symbol to be expanded is the nonterminal b. The set of items for a given grammar G can be constructed using the following algorithm:

1. Start with the empty set of items.
2. For each production rule A → α in G, add the item A → .α to the set of items.
3. Repeat the following until no new items can be added to the set of items:
  a. For each item I in the set of items, and for each terminal t in FIRST(β), where β is the string of symbols to the right of the dot in I, add the item I' to the set of items, where I' is the item I with the dot shifted one symbol to the right.
  b. For each item I in the set of items, and for each nonterminal A in FOLLOW(A), where A is the nonterminal to the left of the dot in I, add the item I' to the set of items, where I' is the item I with the dot shifted one symbol to the right.
4. The set of items is now complete.

The LR (1) parsing algorithm uses the following steps to parse an input string:

1. Initialize the stack to contain the start symbol and the bottom of the input.
2. Repeat the following until the stack is empty and the next symbol is the end of the input:
  a. If the top of the stack is a terminal, consume the next input symbol.
  b. If the top of the stack is a nonterminal, use the LR (1) parser table to find the production rule A → α that should be used to expand the nonterminal. Pop A off the stack and push the symbols of α onto the stack in reverse order.
3. If the stack is empty and the next symbol is the end of the input, the string is accepted. Otherwise, the string is rejected.


using ambiguous grammars

An ambiguous grammar is a formal grammar that has more than one parse tree for some of its strings. That is, there is more than one way to break up a string into its component parts, or more than one way to derive a string from the grammar rules. This can be resolved by using precedence and associativity rules to remove the ambiguity.


an automatic parser
generator

An automatic parser generator is a compiler tool that generates a parser, usually written in C or C++, from a grammar specification. Typically, the input to the parser generator is a set of grammar rules, and the output is a program that will analyze input text and recognize the sequences of tokens that match the grammar.

There are a number of different parser generators available, and each has its own strengths and weaknesses. Some of the more popular parser generators include Bison, ANTLR, and Ragel.


implementation of LR parsing tables.
Syntax-directed Translation: Syntax-directed Translation schemes
There are three phases in a general compiler – lexical, syntax and semantic analysis.
In the lexical phase, the lexical analyzer (scanner) breaks the source program into a sequence of tokens. But it is the duty of a parser to check whether the given source program is syntactically correct or not. If it is syntactically correct, then parser produces a parse tree. If it is syntactically incorrect, then parser detects the error and produces suitable error messages.
What is a Parse Tree: A parse tree is a graphical representation of the syntactic structure of a string. It depicts how the string is generated from the grammar. It is also called as derivation tree.
Types of parsing techniques:
There are two types of parsing techniques –
1) Top Down Parsing
2) Bottom Up Parsing
Top down parsing: In this type of parsing, the parse tree is constructed from the root to the leaves. It starts with the root non-terminal and proceeds to the leaves, which are the terminals. It uses recursive procedure calls to construct the parse tree.
Top Down Parsers can be classified into two types –
1) Predictive Parser
2) Recursive Descent Parser
Predictive Parser: It is a type of recursive descent parser. In this parser, no backtracking is required. It uses a lookahead of one token for making parsing decisions. Tabulation technique is used for building the parsing table for a predictive parser.
Intermediate Code Generation: It is the second phase of a compiler. After the syntax analysis, the next phase is to generate an intermediate code for the source code. Here, optimizations are performed on the parse tree to improve the code efficiency.
Object Code Generation: It is the third and final stage of compilation. In this stage, the intermediate code is translated into the machine code or the target code. Depending on the type of machine, the object code is generated. If the source program is written in a high-level language, then multiple passes are needed to generate the object code.


Implementation of Syntax-directed Translators

A syntax-directed translator dispatches actions to routines according to the structure of the source program. The source program is represented as a parse tree, and a postorder traversal of the parse tree dispatches actions. The order in which the actions are executed is determined by the attribute grammar for the source language. Each type of node in the parse tree has an associated action routine. For ceramic capacitors, the most commonly used value for R is 0.afghaniscript.com 

For each statement in the source program, the translator first parses the statement into a parse tree. It then traverses the parse tree in postorder, during which it dispatches each node to the action routine associated with the node's type. The action routines are responsible for generating the code for the statement. The code for a statement is typically generated by traversing the parse tree again, this time in preorder.


Intermediate code

Intermediate code is a representation of a program in a form that is easier for a compiler to work with than the original code. It is often in a higher-level language than the original code, and it is usually in a form that is easier to translate into the target language.


postfix notation

Postfix notation is aE notational method for writing arithmetic expressions in which operands appear before their operators. For example, the expression "3 + 4" would be written as "3 4 +" in postfix notation. Because of its simplicity, postfix notation is often used in stack-based algorithms and data structures.


Parse trees & syntax trees

There is a distinction between parse trees and syntax trees. A parse tree is usually drawn as an upside-down tree, with the root of the tree at the top and the leaves of the tree at the bottom. A parse tree represents the syntactic structure of the program being parsed, and includes both the lexical tokens from the program and information about their relationships (e.g., operators, order of evaluation, etc.). A syntax tree is a subset of the parse tree, containing only the nodes that represent operators and operands, without the nodes that represent punctuation, order of evaluation, etc.


three address
code

Three address code is a sequence of assembly-like instructions that map to a single machine instruction. Three address code is used by compilers to improve code generation. Each assembly-like instruction in three address code has three operands and an opcode. The first operand is the destination, the second is the source, and the third is an optional source. The opcode specifies the operation to be performed on the operands. The operands are typically registers or memory locations. 

Three address code has a number of advantages over traditional two address code. Three address code can be easier to write and understand. Three address code can also be more efficient, because the compiler can optimize the order of operations. Finally, three address code can be more flexible, because the compiler can choose different instructions for different processors.


quadruple & triples

In computer science, quadruple is an extension of the triple, consisting of four parts instead of three. It is sometimes used in place of tuples, because tuples are immutable, while quadruples are not. In type theory and functional programming, a triple (or 3-tuple, triplet) is a data structure that consists of three elements of the same or different types. A tuple is a finite ordered list (sequence) of elements. An n-tuple is a tuple of order n.

A quadruple is a 4-tuple, meaning it has four components. It can be used to represent data in a variety of ways, including a list of four items, a set of four coordinate points, or a four-digit number.

A triple can be thought of as a data structure that holds three values. The values can be of any type, and they can be named or unnamed. A triple is sometimes called a 3-tuple, or triplet.

A quadruple is similar to a triple, but it has four components instead of three. The quadruple can be used to represent data in a variety of ways, including a list of four items, a set of four coordinate points, or a four-digit number.


translation of assignment statements

The following is a detailed description of the translation of assignment statements in compiler design:

 Assignment statements are one of the basic statement types in almost all programming languages. The assignment statement consists of a variable name on the left side of an equal sign, followed by an expression to be evaluated on the right side. The value of the expression is stored in the variable.

For example, in the C programming language, the statement

x = 3 + 4;

would store the value 7 in the variable x.

In order to translate an assignment statement into machine code, the compiler must first evaluate the expression on the right side of the equal sign. This value is then stored in the memory location corresponding to the variable on the left side of the equal sign.

The memory location of a variable is typically determined when the program is compiled, based on the scope and visibility of the variable. For example, global variables are typically assigned to locations in static memory, while local variables are typically assigned to locations on the stack.

Once the memory location is known, the compiler can generate the code to store the value of the expression in that location. This code will typically use one or more load and store instructions to move the value into the correct memory location.

For example, in the x86 instruction set, the instruction movl can be used to move a 32-bit value into a register or memory location. So, the code to store the value 7 in the variable x might look something like this:

movl $7, %eax # Move the value 7 into the EAX register

movl %eax, x # Move the value in EAX into the memory location of x

This code first loads the value 7 into the EAX register. It then stores the contents of EAX at the memory location of the variable x.

Of course, the actual code generated by the compiler will be much more complex than this, due to optimizations and other factors. But this code provides a basic overview of how an assignment statement is typically translated into machine code.


Boolean expressions

There are many different ways to define Boolean expressions, but they all essentially boil down to being a representation of true or false. In a compiler, Boolean expressions are used to create conditional statements that determine which code should be executed based on whether the expression evaluates to true or false. 

To create a Boolean expression, you first need to have a Boolean operator. These operators will take in one or two Boolean values (or expressions) and return a single Boolean value. The most common Boolean operators are AND, OR, and NOT. 

AND will only return true if both values it is given are true. For example:

(true AND true) = true
(true AND false) = false
(false AND false) = false

OR will return true if at least one of the values it is given is true. For example:

(true OR true) = true
(true OR false) = true
(false OR false) = false

NOT will return the opposite of the value it is given. For example:

(NOT true) = false
(NOT false) = true

You can also have more complex Boolean expressions by nesting operators. For example, the expression "(true AND (false OR true))" would evaluate to true. 

In a compiler, Boolean expressions are used in conjunction with conditional statements. A conditional statement is a set of instructions that will only be executed if a certain condition is met. The condition is typically represented by a Boolean expression. 

If the Boolean expression evaluates to true, then the code in the conditional statement will be executed. If the Boolean expression evaluates to false, then the code will be skipped. 

Boolean expressions can be used to create all sorts of different conditions, and as a result, they can be used to control the flow of a program in a very powerful way.


statements
that alter the flow of control

In compiler design, statements that alter the flow of control are called control statements. Control statements can be used to alter the order in which statements are executed in a program. For example, a control statement can be used to cause a loop to repeat a certain number of times, or to skip over certain statements in a program.


postfix translation

The process of converting an infix expression to a postfix expression is known as infix to postfix translation. Infix notation is the common way of writing expressions. Most people use infix notation for arithmetic expressions without thinking about it.

There are two main advantages of using postfix notation. First, it eliminates the need for parentheses to indicate the order of operations. Second, it is easier to convert an infix expression to a postfix expression than it is to convert a postfix expression to an infix expression.

The easiest way to understand postfix notation is to think of it as an instruction list. Each operator is followed by its operands. For example, the postfix expression 3 5 + means to add 3 and 5. The postfix expression 3 5 * means to multiply 3 and 5.

The rules for converting an infix expression to a postfix expression are as follows:

1. Scan the infix expression from left to right.

2. If the scanning character is an operand, output it.

3. If the scanning character is an operator, and if the operator stack is empty, push the operator onto the stack.

4. If the scanning character is an operator, and if the operator stack is not empty, compare the precedence of the scanning character with the top operator on the stack. If the precedence of the scanning character is greater than the precedence of the top operator on the stack, push the scanning character onto the stack. If the precedence of the scanning character is less than or equal to the precedence of the top operator on the stack, output the top operator on the stack, and then push the scanning character onto the stack.

5. If the scanning character is a left parenthesis, push it onto the stack.

6. If the scanning character is a right parenthesis, pop operators from the stack and output them until a left parenthesis is encountered. Remove the left parenthesis.

7. Repeat steps 2 through 6 until the infix expression is fully scanned.

8. Pop any remaining operators from the stack and output them.


translation with a top down parser. More about
translation: Array references in arithmetic expressions

A top-down parser is a parser that derives the structure of a document from the document's tags. It starts with the
document's root element and then works its way down the document tree, matching each element's start tag with its end
tag.

Top-down parsers are typically used to derive a parse tree for a document. This parse tree can then be used to
generate code or render the document in some other format.

Top-down parsers can be classified into two types: recursive descent parsers and LL(k) parsers.

Recursive descent parsers are the simplest type of top-down parser. They derive the structure of a document by
recursively matching start tags with end tags.

LL(k) parsers are a more sophisticated type of top-down parser. They derive the structure of a document by looking
ahead k symbols in the document and then matching the start tag of the next element with the end tag of the
current element.

Both recursive descent parsers and LL(k) parsers can be implemented using a stack.


procedures call

A procedure is a subroutine that is located in a program or library. A programmer can call a procedure to perform a task, such as displaying information on the screen or performing a calculation. When a procedure is called, the programming execution goes to the first line of code in the procedure and then works its way down the code, line by line, until it reaches the end of the procedure.


declarations and case
statements.
Symbol Tables: Data structure for symbols tables

The compiler uses a symbol table to store information about the program being compiled. This information can include:

• the name of the program,

• the names of the variables and functions used in the program,

• the types of the variables and functions,

• the values of the variables,

• the location of the variables and functions in the program (for example, in memory or on disk),

• the relationships between the variables and functions (for example, which function calls which other functions).

A symbol table is typically implemented as a hash table.


representing scope information. Run-Time
Administration: Implementation of simple stack allocation scheme

A stack allocation scheme is a strategy for allocating storage for variables in a computer program. The scheme is called "stack" because it uses a data structure called a stack to keep track of which variables are currently in use and where they are located.

When a variable is no longer needed, the stack allocation scheme automatically frees up the memory that was being used for that variable. This makes stack allocation very efficient, especially for programs that use a lot of variables that are only needed for a short time.

One downside of stack allocation is that it can be difficult to debug programs that use it, because the memory layout of the program can change from one run to the next. However, this problem can be mitigated by using a debugging tool that is aware of the stack allocation scheme.


storage allocation in block
structured language. Error Detection & Recovery: Lexical Phase errors

In a block structured language, storage allocation refers to the process of assigning memory to different blocks of code so that they can be executed separately. This allows for better organization of code and can make it easier to debugging and optimize code. There are three main ways to allocate storage in a block structured language:

1. Static allocation: This is the simplest form of storage allocation, where each block of code is assigned a fixed amount of memory. This is typically used for small blocks of code that will not change often.

2. Automatic allocation: This is a more flexible form of storage allocation, where the amount of memory assigned to each block of code can change at runtime. This is typically used for larger blocks of code that may need to be resized frequently.

3. Manual allocation: This is the most flexible form of storage allocation, where the developer can explicitly control how memory is allocated to each block of code. This is typically used for custom applications or when working with low-level code.


syntactic phase errors
semantic errors.
Code Generation: Design Issues

Syntactic phase errors are those errors that occur during the process of converting source code into machine code. Semantic errors are those errors that occur during the execution of machine code. Code generation is the process of translating source code into machine code.


the Target Language. Addresses in the Target Code

The complete detailed and indepth description about the Target Language. Addresses in the Target Code in compiler design

The Target Code is the portion of the compiler that generates the machine code for the target platform. The Target Code is responsible for correctly allocating storage for variables, for calculating offsets for fields within data structures, for managing the stack, for calling functions, and for performing all the other low-level operations required by the platform.


Basic
Blocks and Flow Graphs
 Please help

A basic block is a straight-line code sequence with no branches in except 
to the entry and no branches out except at the exit. In other words, a 
basic block is a portion of code that can be executed without having to 
check for branches. Flow graphs are a graphical representation of the 
control flow of a program. They show the sequence of basic blocks that 
will be executed and the conditional and unconditional branches that 
will be taken.


Optimization of Basic Blocks

In compiler design, basic block optimization is the process of optimizing a basic block, which is a straight-line code sequence with no branches in, no branches out other than to the next sequential instruction, and no jumps in other than from the previous sequential instruction.


Code Generator. Code optimization:
Machine-Independent Optimizations
1. Copy Propagation:
Copy Propagation is a simple yet effective optimization technique that can be applied to intermediate code. It is based on the idea of replacing a variable with the value that it has been assigned. For example,

Consider the following code fragment:

x = 3;
y = x + 2;
z = x + y;

After copy propagation, the code fragment can be rewritten as:

y = 3 + 2;
z = 3 + (3 + 2);

2. Constant Folding:
 Constant folding is an optimization technique that is applied to expressions. It is based on the idea of replacing an expression with its value if the value is known at compile time. For example,

Consider the following code fragment:

x = 3 + 4;
y = x * 2;

After constant folding, the code fragment can be rewritten as:

y = (3 + 4) * 2;

3. Dead Code Elimination:
Dead code elimination is an optimization technique that removes code that is no longer reachable from the entry point of a program. For example,

Consider the following code fragment:

x = 3;
if (x > 4)
y = x + 2;

Since the value of x is known to be less than 4, the if statement will never be executed and the assignment to y will never be executed. Therefore, the code fragment can be rewritten as:

x = 3;


Loop optimization

Loop optimization is the process of improving the performance of a computer program by improving the efficiency of its loops.


DAG representation of basic blocks

DAG (Directed Acyclic Graph) is a representation of a set of basic blocks where each node in the graph represents a basic block and each edge represents a possible control flow between two nodes. The edges are labeled with the type of control flow (e.g., true, false, or fall-through). A DAG is acyclic if there is no cycle in the graph.


value numbers and algebraic laws

In compiler design, algebraic laws are used to optimize the performance of a compiler by rewriting equations to be more efficient. The most common algebraic law is the commutative law, which states that the order of addition and multiplication does not matter. For example, if you have the equation "2 + 3 * 4", you can rewrite it as "3 * 4 + 2" because the order of addition and multiplication does not matter. This can be helpful in optimizing code because it can allow the compiler to optimize the order of operations to be more efficient.


Global Data-Flow analysis.

In compiler design, global data-flow analysis is a type of data-flow analysis that computes information about all the variables in a program. Global data-flow analysis is usually more powerful than local data-flow analysis, but it is also more expensive.