

DATA STRUCTURE KCS KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1 Describe how arrays, linked lists, stacks, queues, trees, and graphs are represented in memory,
used by the algorithms and their common applications. K1, K2
CO 2 Discuss the computational efficiency of the sorting and searching algorithms. K2
CO 3 Implementation of Trees and Graphs and perform various operations on these data structure. K3
CO 4 Understanding the concept of recursion, application of recursion and its implementation and
removal of recursion. K4
CO 5 Identify the alternative implementations of data structures with respect to its performance to
solve a real world problem. K5, K6
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-1-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I Introduction: Basic Terminology, Elementary Data Organization, Built in Data Types in C.
Algorithm, Efficiency of an Algorithm, Time and Space Complexity, Asymptotic notations: Big
Oh, Big Theta and Big Omega, Time-Space trade-off. Abstract Data Types (ADT)
08
II
Arrays: Definition, Single and Multidimensional Arrays, Representation of Arrays: Row Major
Order, and Column Major Order, Derivation of Index Formulae for 1-D,2-D,3-D and n-D Array
Application of arrays, Sparse Matrices and their representations.
Linked lists: Array Implementation and Pointer Implementation of Singly Linked Lists, Doubly
Linked List, Circularly Linked List, Operations on a Linked List. Insertion, Deletion, Traversal,
Polynomial Representation and Addition Subtraction & Multiplications of Single variable & Two
variables Polynomial.
08
III
Searching: Concept of Searching, Sequential search, Index Sequential Search, Binary Search.
Concept of Hashing & Collision resolution Techniques used in Hashing. Sorting: Insertion Sort,
Selection, Bubble Sort, Quick Sort, Merge Sort, Heap Sort and Radix Sort.
08
IV
Graphs: Terminology used with Graph, Data Structure for Graph Representations: Adjacency
Matrices, Adjacency List, Adjacency. Graph Traversal: Depth First Search and Breadth First
Search, Connected Component, Spanning Trees, Minimum Cost Spanning Trees: Prims and
Kruskal algorithm. Transitive Closure and Shortest Path algorithm: Warshal Algorithm and
Dijikstra Algorithm.
08
V
Stacks: Abstract Data Type, Primitive Stack operations: Push & Pop, Array and Linked
Implementation of Stack in C, Application of stack: Prefix and Postfix Expressions, Evaluation of
postfix expression, Iteration and Recursion- Principles of recursion, Tail recursion, Removal of
recursion Problem solving using iteration and recursion with examples such as binary search,
Fibonacci numbers, and Hanoi towers. Tradeoffs between iteration and recursion.
Queues: Operations on Queue: Create, Add, Delete, Full and Empty, Circular queues, Array and
linked implementation of queues in C, Dequeue and Priority Queue.
08
Text books:
1. Aaron M. Tenenbaum, Yedidyah Langsam and Moshe J. Augenstein, “Data Structures Using C and C++”,
PHI
 Learning Private Limited, Delhi India
2. Horowitz and Sahani, “Fundamentals of Data Structures”, Galgotia Publications Pvt Ltd Delhi India.
3. Lipschutz, “Data Structures” Schaum’s Outline Series, Tata McGraw-hill Education (India) Pvt. Ltd.
4. Thareja, “Data Structure Using C” Oxford Higher Education.
5. AK Sharma, “Data Structure Using C”, Pearson Education India.
6. Rajesh K. Shukla, “Data Structure Using C and C++” Wiley Dreamtech Publication.
7. Michael T. Goodrich, Roberto Tamassia, David M. Mount “Data Structures and Algorithms in C++”,
 Wiley India.
8. P. S. Deshpandey, “C and Data structure”, Wiley Dreamtech Publication.
9. R. Kruse etal, “Data Structures and Program Design in C”, Pearson Education.
10. Berztiss, AT: Data structures, Theory and Practice, Academic Press.
11. Jean Paul Trembley and Paul G. Sorenson, “An Introduction to Data Structures with applications”,
 McGraw Hill.
12. Adam Drozdek “Data Structures and Algorithm in Java”, Cengage Learning








-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Computer Organization and Architecture KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1 Study of the basic structure and operation of a digital computer system. K1, K2
CO 2 Analysis of the design of arithmetic & logic unit and understanding of the fixed point and floatingpoint arithmetic operations. K2, K4
CO 3 Implementation of control unit techniques and the concept of Pipelining K3
CO 4 Understanding the hierarchical memory system, cache memories and virtual memory K2
CO 5 Understanding the different ways of communicating with I/O devices and standard I/O interfaces K2, K4
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-1-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I Introduction: Functional units of digital system and their interconnections, buses, bus architecture,
types of buses and bus arbitration. Register, bus and memory transfer. Processor organization,
general registers organization, stack organization and addressing modes.
08
II
Arithmetic and logic unit: Look ahead carries adders. Multiplication: Signed operand
multiplication, Booths algorithm and array multiplier. Division and logic operations. Floating point
arithmetic operation, Arithmetic & logic unit design. IEEE Standard for Floating Point Numbers
08
III
Control Unit: Instruction types, formats, instruction cycles and sub cycles (fetch and execute etc),
micro operations, execution of a complete instruction. Program Control, Reduced Instruction Set
Computer, Pipelining. Hardwire and micro programmed control: micro programme sequencing,
concept of horizontal and vertical microprogramming.
08
IV
Memory: Basic concept and hierarchy, semiconductor RAM memories, 2D & 2 1/2D memory
organization. ROM memories. Cache memories: concept and design issues & performance, address
mapping and replacement Auxiliary memories: magnetic disk, magnetic tape and optical disks
Virtual memory: concept implementation.
08
V
Input / Output: Peripheral devices, I/O interface, I/O ports, Interrupts: interrupt hardware, types of
interrupts and exceptions. Modes of Data Transfer: Programmed I/O, interrupt initiated I/O and
Direct Memory Access., I/O channels and processors. Serial Communication: Synchronous &
asynchronous communication, standard communication interfaces.
08
Text books:
 1. Computer System Architecture - M. Mano
2. Carl Hamacher, Zvonko Vranesic, Safwat Zaky Computer Organization, McGraw-Hill, Fifth Edition, Reprint 2012
3. John P. Hayes, Computer Architecture and Organization, Tata McGraw Hill, Third Edition, 1998. Reference books
4. William Stallings, Computer Organization and Architecture-Designing for Performance, Pearson Education, Seventh
edition, 2006.
5. Behrooz Parahami, “Computer Architecture”, Oxford University Press, Eighth Impression, 2011.
6. David A. Patterson and John L. Hennessy, “Computer Architecture-A Quantitative Approach”, Elsevier, a division of
reed India Private Limited, Fifth edition, 2012
7. Structured Computer Organization, Tannenbaum(PHI)








-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Discrete Structures & Theory of Logic KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1 Write an argument using logical notation and determine if the argument is or is not valid. K3, K4
CO 2 Understand the basic principles of sets and operations in sets. K1, K2
CO 3 Demonstrate an understanding of relations and functions and be able to determine their
properties. K3
CO 4 Demonstrate different traversal methods for trees and graphs. K1, K4
CO 5 Model problems in Computer Science using graphs and trees. K2, K6
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-1-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I
Set Theory: Introduction, Combination of sets, Multisets, Ordered pairs. Proofs of some general
identities on sets. Relations: Definition, Operations on relations, Properties of relations, Composite
Relations, Equality of relations, Recursive definition of relation, Order of relations.
Functions: Definition, Classification of functions, Operations on functions, Recursively defined
functions. Growth of Functions.
Natural Numbers: Introduction, Mathematical Induction, Variants of Induction, Induction with
Nonzero Base cases. Proof Methods, Proof by counter – example, Proof by contradiction.
08
II Algebraic Structures: Definition, Groups, Subgroups and order, Cyclic Groups, Cosets,
Lagrange's theorem, Normal Subgroups, Permutation and Symmetric groups, Group
Homomorphisms, Definition and elementary properties of Rings and Fields.
08
III
Lattices: Definition, Properties of lattices – Bounded, Complemented, Modular and Complete
lattice. Boolean Algebra: Introduction, Axioms and Theorems of Boolean algebra, Algebraic
manipulation of Boolean expressions. Simplification of Boolean Functions, Karnaugh maps, Logic
gates, Digital circuits and Boolean algebra.
08
IV
Propositional Logic: Proposition, well formed formula, Truth tables, Tautology, Satisfiability,
Contradiction, Algebra of proposition, Theory of Inference. (8)
Predicate Logic: First order predicate, well formed formula of predicate, quantifiers, Inference
theory of predicate logic.
08
V
Trees: Definition, Binary tree, Binary tree traversal, Binary search tree.
Graphs: Definition and terminology, Representation of graphs, Multigraphs, Bipartite graphs,
Planar graphs, Isomorphism and Homeomorphism of graphs, Euler and Hamiltonian paths, Graph
coloring, Recurrence Relation & Generating function: Recursive definition of functions, Recursive
algorithms, Method of solving recurrences.
Combinatorics: Introduction, Counting Techniques, Pigeonhole Principle
08
Text books:
 1.Koshy, Discrete Structures, Elsevier Pub. 2008 Kenneth H. Rosen, Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications, 6/e,
McGraw-Hill, 2006.
2. B. Kolman, R.C. Busby, and S.C. Ross, Discrete Mathematical Structures, 5/e, Prentice Hall, 2004.
3.E.R. Scheinerman, Mathematics: A Discrete Introduction, Brooks/Cole, 2000.
4.R.P. Grimaldi, Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics, 5/e, Addison Wesley, 2004
5.Liptschutz, Seymour, “ Discrete Mathematics”, McGraw Hill.
6.Trembley, J.P & R. Manohar, “Discrete Mathematical Structure with Application to Computer Science”, McGraw Hill.
4. Deo, 7.Narsingh, “Graph Theory With application to Engineering and Computer.Science.”, PHI.
8. Krishnamurthy, V., “Combinatorics Theory & Application”, East-West Press Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi



-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


 Data Structure using C Lab KCS
Write C Programs to illustrate the concept of the following:
1. Sorting Algorithms-Non-Recursive.
2. Sorting Algorithms-Recursive.
3. Searching Algorithm.
4. Implementation of Stack using Array.
5. Implementation of Queue using Array.
6. Implementation of Circular Queue using Array.
7. Implementation of Stack using Linked List.
8. Implementation of Queue using Linked List.
9. Implementation of Circular Queue using Linked List.
10. Implementation of Tree Structures, Binary Tree, Tree Traversal, Binary Search Tree, Insertion and Deletion in
BST.
11. Graph Implementation, BFS, DFS, Minimum cost spanning tree, shortest path algorithm.
Computer Organization Lab
1. Implementing HALF ADDER, FULL ADDER using basic logic gates
2. Implementing Binary -to -Gray, Gray -to -Binary code conversions.
3. Implementing 3-8 line DECODER.
4. Implementing 4x1 and 8x1 MULTIPLEXERS.
5. Verify the excitation tables of various FLIP-FLOPS.
6. Design of an 8-bit Input/ Output system with four 8-bit Internal Registers.
7. Design of an 8-bit ARITHMETIC LOGIC UNIT.
8. Design the data path of a computer from its register transfer language description.
9. Design the control unit of a computer using either hardwiring or microprogramming based on its register
transfer language description.
10. Implement a simple instruction set computer with a control unit and a data path.
Discrete Structure & Logic Lab
1. Introduction to digital electronics lab- nomenclature of digital ICs, specifications, study of the data sheet, Concept
of Vcc and ground, verification of the truth tables of logic gates using TTL ICs.
2. Implementation of the given Boolean function using logic gates in both SOP and POS forms.
3. Verification of state tables of RS, JK, T and D flip-flops using NAND & NOR gates.
4. Implementation and verification of Decoder using logic gates.
5. Implementation and verification of Encoder using logic gates.
6. Implementation of 4:1 multiplexer using logic gates.
7. Implementation of 1:4 demultiplexer using logic gates.
8. Implementation of 4-bit parallel adder using 7483 IC.
9. Design, and verify the 4-bit synchronous counter.
10. Design, and verify the 4-bit asynchronous counter.
B.TECH. (COMPUTER SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING)
FOURTH SEMESTER (DETAILED SYLLABUS)








-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Operating system KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1 Understand the structure and functions of OS K1, K2
CO 2 Learn about Processes, Threads and Scheduling algorithms. K1, K2
CO 3 Understand the principles of concurrency and Deadlocks K2
CO 4 Learn various memory management scheme K2
CO 5 Study I/O management and File systems. K2,K4
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-0-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I
Introduction : Operating system and functions, Classification of Operating systems- Batch,
Interactive, Time sharing, Real Time System, Multiprocessor Systems, Multiuser Systems,
Multiprocess Systems, Multithreaded Systems, Operating System Structure- Layered structure,
System Components, Operating System services, Reentrant Kernels, Monolithic and Microkernel
Systems.
08
II
Concurrent Processes: Process Concept, Principle of Concurrency, Producer / Consumer Problem,
Mutual Exclusion, Critical Section Problem, Dekker’s solution, Peterson’s solution, Semaphores,
Test and Set operation; Classical Problem in Concurrency- Dining Philosopher Problem, Sleeping
Barber Problem; Inter Process Communication models and Schemes, Process generation.
08
III
CPU Scheduling: Scheduling Concepts, Performance Criteria, Process States, Process Transition
Diagram, Schedulers, Process Control Block (PCB), Process address space, Process identification
information, Threads and their management, Scheduling Algorithms, Multiprocessor Scheduling.
Deadlock: System model, Deadlock characterization, Prevention, Avoidance and detection,
Recovery from deadlock.
08
IV
Memory Management: Basic bare machine, Resident monitor, Multiprogramming with fixed
partitions, Multiprogramming with variable partitions, Protection schemes, Paging, Segmentation,
Paged segmentation, Virtual memory concepts, Demand paging, Performance of demand paging,
Page replacement algorithms, Thrashing, Cache memory organization, Locality of reference.
08
V
I/O Management and Disk Scheduling: I/O devices, and I/O subsystems, I/O buffering, Disk
storage and disk scheduling, RAID. File System: File concept, File organization and access
mechanism, File directories, and File sharing, File system implementation issues, File system
protection and security.
08
Text books:
1. Silberschatz, Galvin and Gagne, “Operating Systems Concepts”, Wiley
2. Sibsankar Halder and Alex A Aravind, “Operating Systems”, Pearson Education
3. Harvey M Dietel, “ An Introduction to Operating System”, Pearson Education
4. D M Dhamdhere, “Operating Systems : A Concept based Approach”, 2nd Edition,
5. TMH 5. William Stallings, “Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles ”, 6th Edition, Pearson Education








-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Theory of Automata and Formal Languages KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1 Analyse and design finite automata, pushdown automata, Turing machines, formal languages, and
grammars
K4, K6
CO 2 Analyse and design, Turing machines, formal languages, and grammars K4, K6
CO 3 Demonstrate the understanding of key notions, such as algorithm, computability, decidability, and
complexity through problem solving K1, K5
CO 4 Prove the basic results of the Theory of Computation. K2,K3
CO 5 State and explain the relevance of the Church-Turing thesis. K1, K5
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-1-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I
Basic Concepts and Automata Theory: Introduction to Theory of Computation- Automata,
Computability and Complexity, Alphabet, Symbol, String, Formal Languages, Deterministic Finite
Automaton (DFA)- Definition, Representation, Acceptability of a String and Language, Non
Deterministic Finite Automaton (NFA), Equivalence of DFA and NFA, NFA with ε-Transition,
Equivalence of NFA’s with and without ε-Transition, Finite Automata with output- Moore
Machine, Mealy Machine, Equivalence of Moore and Mealy Machine, Minimization of Finite
Automata, Myhill-Nerode Theorem, Simulation of DFA and NFA
08
II
Regular Expressions and Languages: Regular Expressions, Transition Graph, Kleen’s Theorem,
Finite Automata and Regular Expression- Arden’s theorem, Algebraic Method Using Arden’s
Theorem, Regular and Non-Regular Languages- Closure properties of Regular Languages,
Pigeonhole Principle, Pumping Lemma, Application of Pumping Lemma, Decidability- Decision
properties, Finite Automata and Regular Languages, Regular Languages and Computers,
Simulation of Transition Graph and Regular language.
08
III
Regular and Non-Regular Grammars: Context Free Grammar(CFG)-Definition, Derivations,
Languages, Derivation Trees and Ambiguity, Regular Grammars-Right Linear and Left Linear
grammars, Conversion of FA into CFG and Regular grammar into FA, Simplification of CFG,
Normal Forms- Chomsky Normal Form(CNF), Greibach Normal Form (GNF), Chomsky
Hierarchy, Programming problems based on the properties of CFGs.
08
IV
Push Down Automata and Properties of Context Free Languages: Nondeterministic Pushdown
Automata (NPDA)- Definition, Moves, A Language Accepted by NPDA, Deterministic Pushdown
Automata(DPDA) and Deterministic Context free Languages(DCFL), Pushdown Automata for
Context Free Languages, Context Free grammars for Pushdown Automata, Two stack Pushdown
Automata, Pumping Lemma for CFL, Closure properties of CFL, Decision Problems of CFL,
Programming problems based on the properties of CFLs.
08
V
Turing Machines and Recursive Function Theory : Basic Turing Machine Model,
Representation of Turing Machines, Language Acceptability of Turing Machines, Techniques for
Turing Machine Construction, Modifications of Turing Machine, Turing Machine as Computer of
Integer Functions, Universal Turing machine, Linear Bounded Automata, Church’s Thesis,
Recursive and Recursively Enumerable language, Halting Problem, Post’s Correspondance
Problem, Introduction to Recursive Function Theory.
08
Text books:
1. Introduction to Automata theory, Languages and Computation, J.E.Hopcraft, R.Motwani, and Ullman. 2nd
edition, Pearson Education Asia
2. Introduction to languages and the theory of computation, J Martin, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill
3. Elements and Theory of Computation, C Papadimitrou and C. L. Lewis, PHI
4. Mathematical Foundation of Computer Science, Y.N.Singh, New Age Internationa








-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




Microprocessor KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1 Apply a basic concept of digital fundamentals to Microprocessor based personal computer
system. K3, K4
CO 2 Analyze a detailed s/w & h/w structure of the Microprocessor. K2,K4
CO 3 Illustrate how the different peripherals (8085/8086) are interfaced with Microprocessor. K3
CO 4 Analyze the properties of Microprocessors(8085/8086) K4
CO 5 Evaluate the data transfer information through serial & parallel ports. K5
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-1-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I Microprocessor evolution and types, microprocessor architecture and operation of its components,
addressing modes, interrupts, data transfer schemes, instruction and data flow, timer and timing
diagram, Interfacing devices.
08
II Pin diagram and internal architecture of 8085 microprocessor, registers, ALU, Control & status,
interrupt and machine cycle. Instruction sets. Addressing modes. Instruction formats Instruction
Classification: data transfer, arithmetic operations, logical operations, branching operations,
machine control and assembler directives.
08
III
Architecture of 8086 microprocessor: register organization, bus interface unit, execution unit,
memory addressing, and memory segmentation. Operating modes. Instruction sets, instruction
format, Types of instructions. Interrupts: hardware and software interrupts.
08
IV
Assembly language programming based on intel 8085/8086. Instructions, data transfer, arithmetic,
logic, branch operations, looping, counting, indexing, programming techniques, counters and time
delays, stacks and subroutines, conditional call and return instructions
08
V Peripheral Devices: 8237 DMA Controller, 8255 programmable peripheral interface,
8253/8254programmable timer/counter, 8259 programmable interrupt controller, 8251 USART and
RS232C.
08
Text books:
1. Gaonkar, Ramesh S , “Microprocessor Architecture, Programming and Applications with
2. 8085”, Penram International Publishing.
3. Ray A K , Bhurchandi K M , “Advanced Microprocessors and Peripherals”, TMH
4. Hall D V ,”Microprocessor Interfacing’, TMH
5. Liu and, “ Introduction to Microprocessor”, TMH
6. Brey, Barry B, “INTEL Microprocessors”, PHI
7. Renu Sigh & B.P. Gibson G A , “ Microcomputer System: The 8086/8088 family’’ ,PHI
8. Aditya P Mathur Sigh, “Microprocessor, Interfacing and Applications M Rafiqzzaman, “Microprocessors, Theory
and Applications
9. J.L. Antonakos, An Introduction to the Intel Family of Microprocessors, Pearson, 1999
 Operating System Lab
1. Study of hardware and software requirements of different operating systems (UNIX,LINUX,WINDOWS XP,
WINDOWS7/8
2. Execute various UNIX system calls for
i. Process management
ii. File management
iii. Input/output Systems calls
3. Implement CPU Scheduling Policies:
i. SJF
ii. Priority
iii. FCFS
iv. Multi-level Queue
4. Implement file storage allocation technique:
i. Contiguous(using array)
ii. Linked –list(using linked-list)
iii. Indirect allocation (indexing)
5. Implementation of contiguous allocation techniques:
i. Worst-Fit
ii. Best- Fit
iii. First- Fit
6. Calculation of external and internal fragmentation
i. Free space list of blocks from system
ii. List process file from the system
7. Implementation of compaction for the continually changing memory layout and calculate total movement of data
8. Implementation of resource allocation graph RAG)
9. Implementation of Banker‟s algorithm
10. Conversion of resource allocation graph (RAG) to wait for graph (WFG) for each type of method used for storing
graph.
11. Implement the solution for Bounded Buffer (producer-consumer)problem using inter process communication
techniques-Semaphores
12. Implement the solutions for Readers-Writers problem using inter process communication technique -Semaphore
 Microprocessor Lab
1. Write a program using 8085 Microprocessor for Decimal, Hexadecimal addition and subtraction of two Numbers.
2. Write a program using 8085 Microprocessor for addition and subtraction of two BCD numbers.
3. To perform multiplication and division of two 8 bit numbers using 8085.
4. To find the largest and smallest number in an array of data using 8085 instruction set.
5. To write a program to arrange an array of data in ascending and descending order.
6. To convert given Hexadecimal number into its equivalent ASCII number and vice versa using 8085 instruction
set.
7. To write a program to initiate 8251 and to check the transmission and reception of character.
8. To interface 8253 programmable interval timer to 8085 and verify the operation of 8253 in six different modes.
9. To interface DAC with 8085 to demonstrate the generation of square, saw tooth and triangular wave.
10. Serial communication between two 8085 through RS-232 C port.
 Python Language Programming Lab
1. To write a python program that takes in command line arguments as input and print the number of arguments.
2. To write a python program to perform Matrix Multiplication.
3. To write a python program to compute the GCD of two numbers.
4. To write a python program to find the most frequent words in a text file.
5. To write a python program find the square root of a number (Newton’s method).
6. To write a python program exponentiation (power of a number).
7. To write a python program find the maximum of a list of numbers.
8. To write a python program linear search.
9. To write a python program Binary search.
10. To write a python program selection sort.
11. To write a python program Insertion sort.
12. To write a python program merge sort.
13. To write a python program first n prime numbers.
14. To write a python program simulate bouncing ball in Pygame.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Mathematics-IV KCS
 ( PDE, Probability and Statistics )
Computer/Electronics/Electrical & Allied Branches, CS/IT, EC/IC, EE/EN,
Mechanical& Allied Branches, (ME/AE/AU/MT/PE/MI/PL)
Textile/Chemical & Allied Branches, TT/TC/CT, CHE/FT
Subject Code KAS302/ KAS402/ KAS302H/ KAS402H
Category Basic Science Course
Subject Name MATHEMATICS-IV
Scheme and Credits L-T-P
Theory
Marks
Sessional
Total Credit Test Assig/Att.
3—1—0 100 30 20 150 4






Pre- requisites (if any) Knowledge of Mathematics I and II of B. Tech or equivalent KCS
Course Outcomes
The objective of this course is to familiarize the students with partial differential
equation, their application and statistical techniques. It aims to present the
students with standard concepts and tools at an intermediate to superior level that
will provide them well towards undertaking a variety of problems in the
discipline.
The students will learn:
 The idea of partial differentiation and types of partial differential equations
 The idea of classification of second partial differential equations, wave , heat
equation
and transmission lines
 The basic ideas of statistics including measures of central tendency,
correlation, regression and their properties.
 The idea s of probability and random variables and various discrete
and continuous probability distributions and their properties.
 The statistical methods of studying data samples, hypothesis testing and statistical
quality control, control charts and their properties.
Module I: Partial Differential Equations
Origin of Partial Differential Equations, Linear and Non Linear Partial Equations of first order,
Lagrange’s Equations, Charpit’s method, Cauchy’s method of Characteristics, Solution of Linear
Partial Differential Equation of Higher order with constant coefficients, Equations reducible to
linear partial differential equations with constant coefficients.
Module II: Applications of Partial Differential Equations:
Classification of linear partial differential equation of second order, Method of separation of
variables, Solution of wave and heat conduction equation up to two dimension, Laplace equation
in two dimensions, Equations of Transmission lines.
Module III: Statistical Techniques I:
Introduction: Measures of central tendency, Moments, Moment generating function (MGF) ,
Skewness, Kurtosis, Curve Fitting , Method of least squares, Fitting of straight lines, Fitting of
second degree parabola, Exponential curves ,Correlation and Rank correlation, Regression
Analysis: Regression lines of y on x and x on y, regression coefficients, properties of regressions
coefficients and non linear regression.
Module IV: Statistical Techniques II:
Probability and Distribution: Introduction, Addition and multiplication law of probability,
Conditional probability, Baye’s theorem, Random variables (Discrete and Continuous Random
variable) Probability mass function and Probability density function, Expectation and variance,
Discrete and Continuous Probability distribution: Binomial, Poission and Normal distributions.
Module V: Statistical Techniques III:
Sampling, Testing of Hypothesis and Statistical Quality Control: Introduction , Sampling
Theory (Small and Large) , Hypothesis, Null hypothesis, Alternative hypothesis, Testing a
Hypothesis, Level of significance, Confidence limits, Test of significance of difference of means,
T-test, F-test and Chi-square test, One way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA).Statistical Quality
Control (SQC) , Control Charts , Control Charts for variables ( X and R Charts), Control Charts
for Variables ( p, np and C charts).
Text Books
1. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 9thEdition, John Wiley &
Sons, 2006.
2. P. G. Hoel, S. C. Port and C. J. Stone, Introduction to Probability Theory,
Universal Book Stall, 2003(Reprint).
3. S. Ross: A First Course in Probability, 6th Ed., Pearson Education India, 2002.
4. W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and its Applications, Vol. 1, 3rd
Ed., Wiley, 1968.
Reference Books
1. B.S. Grewal, Higher Engineering Mathematics, Khanna Publishers, 35th Edition, 2000.
2.T.Veerarajan : Engineering Mathematics (for semester III), Tata McGraw-Hill, New
Delhi.
3. R.K. Jain and S.R.K. Iyenger: Advance Engineering Mathematics; Narosa Publishing
House, New Delhi.
4. J.N. Kapur: Mathematical Statistics; S. Chand & Sons Company Limited, New Delhi.
5. D.N.Elhance,V. Elhance & B.M. Aggarwal: Fundamentals of Statistics; Kitab Mahal








COURSE OUTCOMES KCS
Course Outcome (CO) Bloom’s
Knowledge
Level (KL)
At the end of this course, the students will be able to:
CO 1 Remember the concept of partial differential equation and to solve
partial differential equations K1& K3
CO 2 Analyze the concept of partial differential equations to evaluate
the problems concerned with partial differential equations K4 & K5
CO 3 Understand the concept of correlation, moments, skewness and
kurtosis and curve fitting K2
CO 4 Remember the concept of probability to evaluate probability
distributions K1 & K5
CO 5 Apply the concept of hypothesis testing and statistical quality
control to create control charts K3 & K6
K1 – Remember, K2 – Understand, K3 – Apply, K4 – Analyze, K5 – Evaluate, K6 – Create
Evaluation methodology to be followed:
The evaluation and assessment plan consists of the following components:
a. Class attendance and participation in class discussions etc.
b. Quiz.
c. Tutorials and assignments.
d. Sessional examination.
e. Final examination.
Award of Internal/External Marks:
Assessment procedure will be as follows:
1. These will be comprehensive examinations held on-campus (Sessionals).
2. Quiz.
a. Quiz will be of type multiple choice, fill-in-the-blanks or match the columns.
b. Quiz will be held periodically.
3. Tutorials and assignments
a. The assignments/home-work may be of multiple choice type or comprehensive type at
least one assignment from each Module/Unit.
b. The grades and detailed solutions of assignments (of both types) will be accessible online
after the submission deadline.
4. Final examinations. These will be comprehensive external examinations held on-campus or off
campus (External examination) on dates fixed by the Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam Technical University,
Lucknow.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Technical Communication KCS
 (KAS301/401)
 (Effective from the session 2019-20)
Unit -1 Fundamentals of Technical Communication:
L T P
2 1 0
Technical Communication: Features; Distinction between General and Technical
Communication; Language as a tool of Communication; Dimensions of Communication:
Reading & comprehension; Technical writing: sentences; Paragraph; Technical style: Definition,
types & Methods; The flow of Communication: Downward; upward, Lateral or Horizontal;
Barriers to Communication.
Unit - II Forms of Technical Communication:
Technical Report: Definition & importance; Thesis/Project writing: structure & importance;
synopsis writing: Methods; Technical research Paper writing: Methods & style; Seminar &
Conference paper writing; Expert Technical Lecture: Theme clarity; Analysis & Findings; 7 Cs
of effective business writing: concreteness, completeness, clarity, conciseness, courtesy,
correctness, consideration, C.V./Resume writing; Technical Proposal: Types, Structure & Draft.
Unit - III Technical Presentation: Strategies & Techniques
Presentation: Forms; interpersonal Communication; Class room presentation; style; method;
Individual conferencing: essentials: Public Speaking: method; Techniques: Clarity of substance;
emotion; Humour; Modes of Presentation; Overcoming Stage Fear; Audience Analysis &
retention of audience interest; Methods of Presentation: Interpersonal; Impersonal; Audience
Participation: Quizzes & Interjections.
Unit - IV Technical Communication Skills:
Interview skills; Group Discussion: Objective & Method; Seminar/Conferences Presentation
skills: Focus; Content; Style; Argumentation skills: Devices: Analysis; Cohesion & Emphasis;
Critical thinking; Nuances: Exposition narration & Description; effective business
communication competence: Grammatical; Discourse competence: combination of expression &
conclusion; Socio-linguistic competence: Strategic competence: Solution of communication
problems with verbal and non verbal means.
Unit - V Dimensions of Oral Communication & Voice Dynamics:
Code and Content; Stimulus & Response; Encoding process; Decoding process; Pronunciation
Etiquette; Syllables; Vowel sounds; Consonant sounds; Tone: Rising tone; Falling Tone; Flow in
Speaking; Speaking with a purpose; Speech & personality; Professional Personality Attributes:
Empathy; Considerateness; Leadership; Competence.
Reference Books
1. Technical Communication – Principles and Practices by Meenakshi Raman & Sangeeta
Sharma, Oxford Univ. Press, 2007, New Delhi.
2. Personality Development and Soft Skills by Barun K. Mitra, OUP, 2012, New Delhi.
3. Spoken English- A Manual of Speech and Phonetics by R.K.Bansal & J.B.Harrison,
Orient Blackswan, 2013, New Delhi.
4. Business Correspondence and Report Writing by Prof. R.C. Sharma & Krishna Mohan,
Tata McGraw Hill & Co. Ltd., 2001, New Delhi.
5. Practical Communication: Process and Practice by L.U.B. Pandey; A.I.T.B.S.
Publications India Ltd.; Krishan Nagar, 2014, Delhi.
6. Modern Technical Writing by Sherman, Theodore A (et.al); Apprentice Hall; New
Jersey; U.S.
7. A Text Book of Scientific and Technical Writing by S.D. Sharma; Vikas Publication,
Delhi.
8. Skills for Effective Business Communication by Michael Murphy, Harward University,
U.S.








9. Business Communication for Managers by Payal Mehra, Pearson Publication, Delhi. KCS
Course Outcomes
1. Students will be enabled to understand the nature and objective of Technical
Communication relevant for the work place as Engineers.
2. Students will utilize the technical writing for the purposes of Technical Communication
and its exposure in various dimensions.
3. Students would imbibe inputs by presentation skills to enhance confidence in face of
diverse audience.
4. Technical communication skills will create a vast know-how of the application of the
learning to promote their technical competence.
5. It would enable them to evaluate their efficacy as fluent & efficient communicators by
learning the voice-dynamics.






Universal Human Values and Professional Ethics  KCS

Objectives:
1. To help students distinguish between values and skills, and understand the
need, basic guidelines, content and process of value education.
2. To help students initiate a process of dialog within themselves to know what
they ‘really want to be’ in their life and profession
3. To help students understand the meaning of happiness and prosperity for a
human being.
4. To facilitate the students to understand harmony at all the levels of human
living, and live accordingly.
5. To facilitate the students in applying the understanding of harmony in





existence in their profession and lead an ethical life KCS
Course Outcome:
On completion of this course, the students will be able to
1. Understand the significance of value inputs in a classroom, distinguish
between values and skills, understand the need, basic guidelines, content and
process of value education, explore the meaning of happiness and prosperity
and do a correct appraisal of the current scenario in the society
2. Distinguish between the Self and the Body, understand the meaning of
Harmony in the Self the Co-existence of Self and Body.
3. Understand the value of harmonious relationship based on trust, respect and
other naturally acceptable feelings in human-human relationships and
explore their role in ensuring a harmonious society
4. Understand the harmony in nature and existence, and work out their
mutually fulfilling participation in the nature.
5. Distinguish between ethical and unethical practices, and start working out
the strategy to actualize a harmonious environment wherever they work.
Catalogue Description
Every human being has two sets of questions to answer for his life: a) what to
do? and, b) how to do?. The first set pertains to the value domain, and the other
to the skill domain. Both are complimentary, but value domain has a higher
priority. Today, education has become more and more skill biased, and hence,
the basic aspiration of a human being, that is to live with happiness and
prosperity, gets defeated, in spite of abundant technological progress. This
course is aimed at giving inputs that will help to ensure the right understanding
and right feelings in the students in their life and profession, enabling them to
lead an ethical life. In this course, the students learn the process of selfexploration, the difference between the Self and the Body, the
naturally acceptable feelings in relationships in a family, the comprehensive
human goal in the society, the mutual fulfillment in the nature and the coexistence in existence. As a natural outcome of such inputs, they are able to
evaluate an ethical life and profession ahead.
UNIT-1 Course Introduction - Need, Basic Guidelines, Content and
Process for Value Education
Understanding the need, basic guidelines, content and process for Value Education,
Self-Exploration–what is it? - its content and process; ‘Natural Acceptance’ and
Experiential Validation- as the mechanism for self exploration, Continuous
Happiness and Prosperity- A look at basic Human Aspirations, Right
understanding, Relationship and Physical Facilities- the basic requirements for
fulfillment of aspirations of every human being with their correct priority,
Understanding Happiness and Prosperity correctly- A critical appraisal of the
current scenario, Method to fulfill the above human aspirations: understanding and
living in harmony at various levels.
UNIT-2 Understanding Harmony in the Human Being - Harmony in
Myself
Understanding human being as a co-existence of the sentient ‘I’ and the material
‘Body’, Understanding the needs of Self (‘I’) and ‘Body’ - Sukh and Suvidha,
Understanding the Body as an instrument of ‘I’ (I being the doer, seer and enjoyer),
Understanding the characteristics and activities of ‘I’ and harmony in ‘I’,
Understanding the harmony of I with the Body: Sanyam and Swasthya; correct
appraisal of Physical needs, meaning of Prosperity in detail, Programs to
ensure Sanyam and Swasthya.
UNIT-3 Understanding Harmony in the Family and Society- Harmony in
Human-Human Relationship
Understanding harmony in the Family- the basic unit of human interaction ,
Understanding values in human-human relationship; meaning of Nyaya and
program for its fulfillment to ensure Ubhay-tripti; Trust (Vishwas) and Respect
(Samman) as the foundational values of relationship, Understanding the meaning of
Vishwas; Difference between intention and competence, Understanding the
meaning of Samman, Difference between respect and differentiation; the other
salient values in relationship, Understanding the harmony in the society (society
being an extension of family): Samadhan, Samridhi, Abhay, Sah-astitva as
comprehensive Human Goals, Visualizing a universal harmonious order in societyUndivided Society (AkhandSamaj), Universal Order (SarvabhaumVyawastha )-
from family to world family!.
UNIT-4 Understanding Harmony in the Nature and Existence - Whole
existence as Co-existence
Understanding the harmony in the Nature, Interconnectedness and mutual
fulfillment among the four orders of nature- recyclability and self-regulation in
nature, Understanding Existence as Co-existence (Sah-astitva) of mutually
interacting units in all-pervasive space, Holistic perception of harmony at all levels
of existence.
UNIT-5 Implications of the above Holistic Understanding of Harmony on
Professional Ethics
Natural acceptance of human values, Definitiveness of Ethical Human Conduct,
Basis for Humanistic Education, Humanistic Constitution and Humanistic
Universal Order, Competence in Professional Ethics: a) Ability to utilize the
professional competence for augmenting universal human order, b) Ability to
identify the scope and characteristics of people-friendly and eco-friendly
production systems, technologies and management models, Case studies of typical
holistic technologies, management models and production systems, Strategy for
transition from the present state to Universal Human Order: a) At the level of
individual: as socially and ecologically responsible engineers, technologists and
managers, b) At the level of society: as mutually enriching institutions and
organizations.
Text Books:
1. R R Gaur, R Sangal, G P Bagaria, 2009, A Foundation Course in Human
Values and Professional Ethics.
References:
1. Ivan Illich, 1974, Energy & Equity, The Trinity Press, Worcester, and
Harper Collins, USA
2. E.F. Schumacher, 1973, Small is Beautiful: a study of economics as if
people mattered, Blond & Briggs, Britain.
3. Sussan George, 1976, How the Other Half Dies, Penguin Press. Reprinted
1986, 1991
4. Donella H. Meadows, Dennis L. Meadows, Jorgen Randers, William W.
Behrens III, 1972, Limits to Growth – Club of Rome’s report, Universe
Books.
5. A Nagraj, 1998, Jeevan Vidya Ek Parichay, Divya Path Sansthan,
Amarkantak.
6. P L Dhar, RR Gaur, 1990, Science and Humanism, Commonwealth
Publishers.
7. A N Tripathy, 2003, Human Values, New Age International Publishers.
8. SubhasPalekar, 2000, How to practice Natural Farming, Pracheen (Vaidik)
KrishiTantraShodh, Amravati.
9. E G Seebauer & Robert L. Berry, 2000, Fundamentals of Ethics for
Scientists & Engineers , Oxford University Press
10. M Govindrajran, S Natrajan & V.S. Senthil Kumar, Engineering Ethics
(including Human Values), Eastern Economy Edition, Prentice Hall of
India Ltd.
11. B P Banerjee, 2005, Foundations of Ethics and Management, Excel Books.
12. B L Bajpai, 2004, Indian Ethos and Modern Management, New Royal
Book Co., Lucknow. Reprinted 2008.
Mode of Evaluation:
Assignment/ Seminar/Continuous Assessment Test/Semester End Exam

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




COMPUTER SYSTEM SECURITY KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1
To discover software bugs that pose cyber security threats and to explain how to fix the bugs to
mitigate such threats K1, K2
CO 2
To discover cyber attack scenarios to web browsers and web servers and to explain how to
mitigate such threats K2
CO 3
To discover and explain mobile software bugs posing cyber security threats, explain and
recreate exploits, and to explain mitigation techniques. K3
CO 4
To articulate the urgent need for cyber security in critical computer systems, networks, and
world wide web, and to explain various threat scenarios K4
CO 5
To articulate the well known cyber attack incidents, explain the attack scenarios, and explain
mitigation techniques. K5, K6
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-1-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I
Computer System Security Introduction: Introduction, What is computer security and what to l
earn? , Sample Attacks, The Marketplace for vulnerabilities, Error 404 Hacking digital India part 1
chase.
Hijacking & Defense: Control Hijacking ,More Control Hijacking attacks integer overflow ,More
Control Hijacking attacks format string vulnerabilities, Defense against Control Hijacking -
Platform Defenses, Defense against Control Hijacking - Run-time Defenses, Advanced Control
Hijacking attacks.
08
II
Confidentiality Policies: Confinement Principle ,Detour Unix user IDs process IDs and privileges
, More on confinement techniques ,System call interposition ,Error 404 digital Hacking in India
part 2 chase , VM based isolation ,Confinement principle ,Software fault isolation , Rootkits
,Intrusion Detection Systems
08
III
Secure architecture principles isolation and leas: Access Control Concepts , Unix and windows
access control summary ,Other issues in access control ,Introduction to browser isolation .
Web security landscape : Web security definitions goals and threat models , HTTP content
rendering .Browser isolation .Security interface , Cookies frames and frame busting, Major web
server threats ,Cross site request forgery ,Cross site scripting ,Defenses and protections against XSS
, Finding vulnerabilities ,Secure development.
08
IV Basic cryptography: Public key cryptography ,RSA public key crypto ,Digital signature Hash
functions ,Public key distribution ,Real world protocols ,Basic terminologies ,Email security
certificates ,Transport Layer security TLS ,IP security , DNS security.
08
V
Internet Infrastructure: Basic security problems , Routing security ,DNS revisited ,Summary of
weaknesses of internet security ,.Link layer connectivity and TCP IP connectivity , Packet filtering
firewall ,Intrusion detection.
08
\
Text books:
1. William Stallings, Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards, Prentice Hall, 4th edition, 2010.
2. Michael T. Goodrich and Roberto Tamassia, Introduction to Computer Security, Addison Wesley, 2011.
3. William Stallings, Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards, Prentice Hall, 4th edition, 2010.
4. Alfred J. Menezes, Paul C. van Oorschot and Scott A. Vanstone, Handbook of Applied Cryptography, CRC Press,
2001.
Mapped With : https://ict.iitk.ac.in/product/computer-system-security/








-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------




PYTHON PROGRAMMING KCS
Course Outcome ( CO) Bloom’s Knowledge Level (KL)
At the end of course , the student will be able to understand
CO 1 To read and write simple Python programs. K1, K2
CO 2 To develop Python programs with conditionals and loops. K2, K4
CO 3 To define Python functions and to use Python data structures –- lists, tuples, dictionaries K3
CO 4 To do input/output with files in Python K2
CO 5 To do searching ,sorting and merging in Python K2, K4
DETAILED SYLLABUS 3-1-0
Unit Topic Proposed
Lecture
I
Introduction: The Programming Cycle for Python , Python IDE, Interacting with Python Programs ,
Elements of Python, Type Conversion.
Basics: Expressions, Assignment Statement, Arithmetic Operators, Operator Precedence, Boolean
Expression.
08
II
Conditionals: Conditional statement in Python (if-else statement, its working and execution),
Nested-if statement and Elif statement in Python, Expression Evaluation & Float Representation.
Loops: Purpose and working of loops , While loop including its working, For Loop , Nested Loops ,
Break and Continue.
08
III
Function: Parts of A Function , Execution of A Function , Keyword and Default Arguments ,Scope
Rules.
Strings : Length of the string and perform Concatenation and Repeat operations in it. Indexing and
Slicing of Strings.
Python Data Structure : Tuples , Unpacking Sequences , Lists , Mutable Sequences , List
Comprehension , Sets , Dictionaries
Higher Order Functions: Treat functions as first class Objects , Lambda Expressions
08
IV
Sieve of Eratosthenes: generate prime numbers with the help of an algorithm given by the Greek
Mathematician named Eratosthenes, whose algorithm is known as Sieve of Eratosthenes.
File I/O : File input and output operations in Python Programming
Exceptions and Assertions
Modules : Introduction , Importing Modules ,
Abstract Data Types : Abstract data types and ADT interface in Python Programming.
Classes : Class definition and other operations in the classes , Special Methods ( such as _init_,
_str_, comparison methods and Arithmetic methods etc.) , Class Example , Inheritance , Inheritance
and OOP.
08
V
Iterators & Recursion: Recursive Fibonacci , Tower Of Hanoi
Search : Simple Search and Estimating Search Time , Binary Search and Estimating Binary Search
Time
Sorting & Merging: Selection Sort , Merge List , Merge Sort , Higher Order Sort
08
Text books:
1. Allen B. Downey, ``Think Python: How to Think Like a Computer Scientist‘‘, 2nd edition, Updated for Python 3,
Shroff/O‘Reilly Publishers, 2016 (http://greenteapress.com/wp/thinkpython/)
2. Guido van Rossum and Fred L. Drake Jr, ―An Introduction to Python – Revised and updated for Python 3.2, Network
Theory Ltd., 2011.
3.John V Guttag, ―Introduction to Computation and Programming Using Python‘‘, Revised and expanded Edition, MIT
Press , 2013
4.Robert Sedgewick, Kevin Wayne, Robert Dondero, ―Introduction to Programming in Python: An Inter-disciplinary
Approach, Pearson India Education Services Pvt. Ltd., 2016.
5.Timothy A. Budd, ―Exploring Python‖, Mc-Graw Hill Education (India) Private Ltd.,, 2015.
6.Kenneth A. Lambert, ―Fundamentals of Python: First Programs‖, CENGAGE Learning, 2012.
7.Charles Dierbach, ―Introduction to Computer Science using Python: A Computational ProblemSolving Focus, Wiley
India Edition, 2013.
8.Paul Gries, Jennifer Campbell and Jason Montojo, ―Practical Programming: An Introduction to Computer Science
using Python 3‖, Second edition, Pragmatic Programmers, LLC, 2013.
Mapped With : https://ict.iitk.ac.in/product/python-programming-a-practical-approach/
